TO THE JULY 28
WORK SESSION OF THE ANN ARBOR
CITY COUNCIL WE ARE HERE TODAY
TO DISCUSS GUARANTEED INCOME
PROGRAM, UPDATE THE TREE LINE
TRAIL UPDATE AND DECLINES IN
415 WEST WASHINGTON PROPOSALS.
MR. TONY.
>> GOOD EVENING, MAYOR.
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
GLAD TO BEFORE YOU THIS EVENING
WE'RE GOING TO TOUCH FAIRLY
BRIEFLY ON EACH OF THE THREE
TOPICS THAT THE MAYOR MENTIONED
ALL OF OUR RESIDENTS WILL HAVE
A FEW SLIDES TO SHOW THIS
EVENING INCLUDING MYSELF WHEN
WE GET TO THE REAL ESTATE
PORTION.
>> FIRST UP WILL BE THE
GUARANTEED INCOME PROGRAM AND
WE'VE GOT DR. KRISTIN FROM THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN HERE TO
TALK ABOUT THE RESEARCH.
YOU WILL RECALL THAT WE FUNDED
THIS OUT OF ARPA FUNDING AND WE
AGREED AT THE TIME THAT IT
WASN'T SIMPLY A MATTER
OF PICKING OUT FAMILIES TO
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO BUT THAT
THERE WOULD BE A RESEARCH
COMPONENT THAT WOULD SORT
OF TRACK HOW THINGS HAVE
EVOLVED.
SO TONIGHT IS JUST TO GIVE YOU
AN UPDATE ON HOW IT'S BEEN
GOING AND WHAT THE FINDINGS
HAVE BEEN TO DATE AND THEN
FOLLOWING DR. NORM HERBERTON IS
HERE REPRESENTING THE TREE LINE
AND HE WILL COME AND WALK
THROUGH SOME SLIDES FOR HIS
PROGRAM.
SO THE WAY THAT WE'RE
STRUCTURED YOU NEED TO ASK YOUR
QUESTIONS AT THE END OF EACH
SEGMENT BECAUSE ONCE THOSE
PEOPLE HAVE ANSWERED YOUR
QUESTIONS, THEY'RE GOING TO RUN
OUT INTO THE HUMIDITY AND ACT
LIKE IT'S REALLY COOL.
SO FROM FROM AN ENVIRONMENTAL
STANDPOINT, I DON'T KNOW THAT
KILLING BUGS IS THE THING THAT
I THINK WE'RE SUPPOSED TO LET
THEM ROAM FREE
.
COME ON, DR.
WELL, THANKS FOR
HAVING ME HERE TONIGHT.
KRISTEN SETOUT UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN SCHOOL OF SOCIAL
WORK FOR THE SCHOOL OF PUBLIC
POLICY WARD ONE RESIDENT AND WE
JUST JUST GIVE YOU SOME A
GLIMPSE INTO SOME OF WHAT WE'RE
FINDING WITH THE CAUTION THAT
ALL OF OUR RESULTS ARE
PRELIMINARY JUST BECAUSE WE
HAVEN'T DONE ALL OF THE DATA
CHECKS THAT WE WANT TO DO
BEFORE DOING A PUBLIC RELEASE
AND YOU CAN GO THROUGH WHICH IS
GREAT IN YOUR BACK.
>> YEAH.
SO WHAT I'LL DO IN JUST THE
TIME THAT I HAVE IS JUST GIVE A
REFRESHER ON WHAT THE
GUARANTEED INCOME PROGRAM IS
GAGNé TO SOME PRELIMINARY
RESEARCH FINDINGS.
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT SOME
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
WE'VE DONE AND THEN NEXT STEPS
AS THIS PROJECT IS SORT OF IN
THE DOWNHILL PHASE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WHAT'S GIGATON GUARANTEED
INCOME TO GROW AND ARBER IS
WHAT IT STANDS FOR.
THIS IS THE PILOT FUNDED WITH
ARPA DOLLARS.
WE ALSO HAD MONEY FROM THE ANN
ARBOR AREA COMMUNITY FOUNDATION
SO THAT WE COULD MAKE SURE THAT
WE COULD KEEP WHAT'S CALLED A
CONTROL GROUP AS PART OF THE
STUDY AND GIVE THEM A MODEST
TWENTY FIVE DOLLARS A MONTH FOR
STAYING IN THE RESEARCH.
SO WHAT WE DID AFTER AN
APPLICATION PROCESS IS THAT WE
DID A WE RANDOMLY SELECTED
THROUGH A STRATIFIED RANDOM
SAMPLE PROCESS.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT WE
PICKED APPLICANTS, WE PICKED
PEOPLE THAT REFLECTED A FEW
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE APPLICANT POOL.
SO ONE HUNDRED FOLKS WERE
SELECTED TO GET FIVE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY EIGHT DOLLARS A
MONTH FOR TWENTY FOUR MONTHS.
THE LAST PAYMENT WILL BE IN
DECEMBER AND THEN THE OTHER ONE
HUNDRED ARE TAKING PART IN THE
STUDY AS A COMPARISON GROUP.
THE ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA WHICH
WERE DECIDED ON IN CONJUNCTION
WITH YOU ALL AND WITH FORMER
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER FORNIER,
THE RESIDENTS OF THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR HAVE LOW TO
MODERATE INCOME MEANING LESS
THAN TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY
FIVE PERCENT OF THE FEDERAL
POVERTY LINE WHICH IS ABOUT
FIFTY SIX THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR FOR A FAMILY OF THREE MOST
LIKE EIGHTY FIVE PERCENT OF OUR
RESPONDENTS HAVE INCOME BELOW
FORTY SIX THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR OR EVEN QUITE LOW THE
MONEY THEY CAN DO WHATEVER THEY
WANT WITH THAT FIVE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY EIGHT DOLLARS THEY CAN
SPEND IT, THEY CAN SAVE IT,
THEY CAN USE IT TO UPGRADE
THEIR THEIR RENTAL SITUATION.
THEY CAN INVEST
IN IN THEIR
BUSINESS BECAUSE ONE OF THE
OTHER CRITERIA ALTHOUGH I WILL
SAY THIS IS WAS VERY LOOSE WAS
TO GEAR THE PROGRAM TOWARD
ENTREPOT IGNORES MICRO BUSINESS
OWNERS BASICALLY IF YOU BABYSAT
IF YOU WERE YOUR WERE QUALIFIED
AND WE DIDN'T VERIFY THAT WE
TOOK PEOPLE AT THEIR AT THEIR
WORD WE ALSO IMPORTANTLY GOT
WAIVERS FROM THE MICHIGAN
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES AND THE ANN AREA
HOUSING AUTHORITY SO THAT THIS
INCOME DOESN'T COUNT AGAINST
THEIR BENEFITS.
WE WEREN'T ABLE TO GET THAT
FROM THE SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION AND SO WE
COUNSELED SSI RECIPIENTS AWAY
FROM THIS BECAUSE THEIR THEIR
BENEFITS HAVE BEEN REDUCED
DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO I'M GOING TO GIVE JUST SOME
A FEW HIGHLIGHTS FROM OUR
BASELINE SURVEY WHICH IS THE
SURVEY WE ADMINISTERED WHEN
PEOPLE WERE SELECTED INTO THE
PROGRAM BUT DIDN'T HAVE THE
PAYMENTS YET THE YEAR ONE
SURVEYS WHICH WE COLLECTED THIS
WINTER AND THEN SOME
QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS THAT WE
DID LAST SUMMER WE'LL SAY TO
THAT KNOW OUR THE MEDIAN AGE
OF OUR PARTICIPANTS IS ABOUT
THIRTY THREE RANGING IN AGE
FROM EIGHTEEN TO SIXTY ONE.
ABOUT 60 PERCENT ARE WOMEN AND
THIS REALLY DOES REFLECT SORT
OF CHARACTERISTICS OF KIND
OF WHO'S TRYING TO GET SOME
KIND OF ENTREPRENEURIAL EFFORT
OFF THE GROUND FROM WHAT WE
KNOW NATIONALLY REFLECTING THE
CHARACTERISTICS OF WHO APPLIED
FOR THE PROGRAM COMPARED TO ANN
ARBOR RESIDENTS AS A WHOLE,
MORE OF OUR PARTICIPANTS ARE
BLACK OR AFRICAN AMERICAN AND
FEWER IDENTIFY AS WHITE.
>> THEY DO ALL SORTS OF THINGS
.
SOME ARE DOING THEIR BUSINESS
WORK IS PERSONALIZED SERVICES
SO HAIRCUTTING NAILS, OTHERS DO
MAINTENANCE WORK WHETHER THAT'S
CARS, LAWN WORK, SOME ARTISTS
AND OTHER THE MAJORITY OF FOLKS
THOUGH ARE DOING OTHER THINGS.
SO WHAT ARE SOME OF THOSE OTHER
THINGS?
SELLING AND RESELLING ITEMS WAS
MENTIONED BY QUITE A FEW.
NOT SURPRISINGLY THIS IS U OF M
A TOWN PARTICIPATING IN
RESEARCH STUDIES.
I WORKING THROUGH ONLINE
PLATFORMS SO DOING GIG WORK
DRIVING FOR UBER A LOT OF DASH
FOLKS AND THEN A VARIETY
OF OTHER ACTIVITIES IN WHICH
PEOPLE I ENGAGE SO WE JUST
AGAIN HAVE VERY PRELIMINARY
RESULTS AND WE HAVE ONLY LOOKED
SO FAR AT ONE OF OUR RESEARCH
QUESTIONS WHICH WAS DOES
GETTING A GUARANTEED INCOME
PAYMENT POSITIVELY AFFECT
PEOPLE'S WELLBEING AS IT
RELATES TO MEASURES OF MATERIAL
HARDSHIP, FOOD INSECURITY AND
OTHER FORMS OF INSTABILITY?
WE DON'T FIND ANY STATISTICALLY
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THOSE GETTING THE PAYMENT AND
THOSE NOT GETTING THE PAYMENT
ON FOOD INSECURITY SO NOT
HAVING ENOUGH TO EAT HOUSING
INSECURITY EITHER BEING BEHIND
IN RENT OR YOUR MORTGAGE OR
UTILITY SHUT OFFS.
THAT SAID, I DO WANT TO POINT
OUT WE HAVE KIND OF A LAMANI
HIGH RATES OF FOOD INSECURITY
AMONG THE FOLKS IN OUR IN OUR
SAMPLE.
SO ALMOST DOUBLE WHAT THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE WOULD BE FOR A
LOW FOR LOW INCOME FOLKS SO
BETWEEN FIFTY EIGHT AND SIXTY
ONE PERCENT AND THAT IS
SOMETHING I THINK YOU KNOW,
PROBABLY SHOULD CONCERN US
PARTICULARLY GIVEN SOME OF THE
POLICY CHANGES WE SEE COMING
DOWN THE PIKE WITH THE
SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
SO WHY NOT?
WELL IS FIVE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
EIGHT DOLLARS ENOUGH TO LIKE
REALLY MOVE THE NEEDLE.
THAT IS A QUESTION.
IT'S ALSO COULD BE THE CASE
THAT WE WON'T SEE ANY ANY REAL
DIFFERENCES UNTIL ANOTHER YEAR
IN THE PROGRAM AND SOME OF THE
OTHER PILOTS THAT ARE OPERATING
AROUND THE COUNTRY, THAT'S WHAT
THEY'VE AND FINDING LIKE SORT
OF YEAR ONE IS SORT OF CATCH
YOUR BREATH BREATH AND CATCH UP
AND YEAR TWO IS WHEN YOU START
TO SEE SOME SOME MOVEMENT
INCLUDING PEOPLE MAKING
INVESTMENTS IN THEMSELVES,
GOING BACK TO SCHOOL, GOING TO
JOB TRAINING AND THE LIKE.
ONE DIFFERENCE WE DID SEE IS
THAT PEOPLE WHO ARE GETTING THE
PAYMENTS ARE MORE LIKELY TO
BELIEVE THAT THEIR FINANCIAL
SITUATION IS BETTER THAN IT WAS
A YEAR AGO.
SO AT LEAST IN TERMS OF HOW
THEY FEEL ABOUT THEIR FINANCES,
THEY FEEL BETTER.
AND JUST TO GIVE A LITTLE BIT
FROM THE QUALITATIVE
INTERVIEWS, ONE PERSON SAID
THAT THE MONEY WAS REALLY JUST
BROUGHT THEM A FEELING
OF RELIEF.
YOU KNOW, I CAN BE A LITTLE BIT
MORE HOPEFUL ABOUT MY FINANCIAL
FUTURE WHICH IS A BIG DEAL.
ANOTHER THEME THAT WE HEARD AND
WE KEEP HEARING WE STARTED
DOING A SECOND ROUND
OF INTERVIEWS, A COUPLE
OF WEEKS AGO.
IS THAT COMPARED TO OTHER
BENEFIT PROGRAMS THAT FOLKS
MIGHT RECEIVE OR HAVE RECEIVED
THAT THE GUARANTEED INCOME
MONEY IS MONEY WITH THAT GIVES
DIGNITY.
SO ONE PERSON SAID I DOESN'T
FEEL LIKE I HAVE TO JUMP
THROUGH A BUNCH OF HOOPS OR
JUSTIFY THE FACT THAT I'M
GETTING THIS MONEY LIKE YOU DO
IN PUBLIC ASSISTANCE.
I DON'T HAVE TO DO A MANDATORY
JOB TRAINING.
YOU KNOW, IT WOULD BE REALLY
GREAT IF OUR SOCIETY JUST HAD A
FEW MORE SAFETY NETS AND
TREATED YOU WITH A LITTLE BIT
MORE DIGNITY AND THE OTHER DAY
TO A WOMAN SAID LIKE THIS
REALLY MAKES ME FEEL LIKE A
CITY CARES ABOUT ME, YOU KNOW,
WHICH IS, YOU KNOW, HARD TO
QUANTIFY BUT SOMETHING
IMPORTANT NONETHELESS JUST
TURNING BRIEFLY TO COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT AH OUR
COMMUNICATIONS DIRECTOR WHAT
SHE'S BEEN INVOLVED WITH SOME
OF THE NATIONAL EFFORTS TO KIND
OF TRY TO CHANGE THE NARRATIVE
AROUND POVERTY AND EXPERIENCES
OF FOLKS WITH LOW INCOME.
SO SHE WORKED WITH GROUND
COVER NEWS AND IN MAY THEY
RELEASED A SPECIAL ISSUE
DEVOTED TO THE PILOT WHERE SOME
OF THEIR THEIR STAFF
INTERVIEWED SOME OF OUR
PARTICIPANTS.
WE HAD A COMMUNITY CONVERSATION
ABOUT THAT IN MAY AND THEN WE
HAVE A QUARTERLY NEWSLETTER
THAT HAS JUST OVER ELEVEN
HUNDRED SUBSCRIBERS AND THEY
GET UPDATES ABOUT THE PILOT AS
WELL AS NEWS ABOUT OTHER PILOTS
THAT ARE OPERATING AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
>> SO JUST NEXT STEPS SO WE'RE
TRYING TO CONTACT FOLKS AND
INTERVIEW THEM AGAIN, SEE HOW
THEY'RE DOING THIS SUMMER.
OUR GOAL IS TO PRODUCE A PUBLIC
FACING REPORT THAT HAS SOME
OF THE YEAR ONE FINDINGS ON IT.
ALSO IN THE CONTRACT WAS THAT
WE NEEDED TO PRODUCE JOURNAL
ARTICLES FOR ACADEMIC
PUBLICATION AND WE ARE DOING
THAT.
WE HAVE TO IN PROCESS AND ONE
THAT'S UNDER REVIEW WHAT WE'LL
BE SPENDING SOME TIME THOUGH
DOING IN THE FALL IS REALLY
KIND OF GETTING FOLKS READY FOR
THE FACT THAT THE PAYMENTS WILL
BE ENDING SO THAT THIS ISN'T A
SURPRISE AND ALSO MAYBE HELPING
THEM DIRECTING THEM TOWARD
RESOURCES THE COMMUNITY THAT
THEY MIGHT NEED AS THAT AS THE
PILOT WINDS DOWN AND THEN THE
LATE FALL BEFORE THE PAYMENTS
AND WE'LL DO ONE MORE SURVEY TO
LOOK AT FINAL AND IMPACTS AND
DO SOME ANALYSIS AND PRODUCE A
FINAL REPORT BEFORE THE
CONTRACTS OVER AT THE END
OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX QUESTIONS
.
YES.
LOOK AT NEXT STEPS PROJECT I
SUPPOSE AND I'M CURIOUS WHAT
YOUR FINDINGS ARE YOU NOTICE
THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE TWO
OF YOU ANTICIPATING JUST
WANTING TO TRY TO FOLLOW UP
BETWEEN IN THE STUDY GROUP AT
THE END OF YEAR THREE OR FOUR
THERE'S KIND OF MORE ON YOU TO
GO.
>> YEAH, WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
LIKE WHERE WE COULD TURN TO
RAISE SOME MONEY TO DO THAT.
THE FUNDING ENVIRONMENT FOR
RESEARCH HAS FUNDAMENTALLY
SHIFTED BUT WE'RE DEFINITELY
INTERESTED IN THAT.
I THINK THE ANN ARBOR AREA
COMMUNITY FOUNDATION IS
DEFINITELY INTERESTED IN THIS
TOPIC SO THEY MIGHT BE A A
PARTNER IN THAT IS ARE THERE
ANY REASONS THAT YOU MIGHT SAY
THAT THE RESEARCH GROUP
CONSIDERS FOR THE THE LACK
OF PROGRESS OR THE LACK
OF DISTINCTION ON FOOD
INSECURITY?
>> I MEAN, YOU KNOW, IN THIS
PAST YEAR GROCERY PRICES HAVE
JUST REALLY SHOT UP WHEN I LOOK
AT WHO'S IN THE PILOT, YOU
KNOW, DESPITE HAVING LOW
INCOMES, A LOT OF THEM ARE NOT
ACTUALLY ELIGIBLE FOR SNAP, YOU
KNOW, THROUGH AT LEAST THROUGH
TWELVE MONTHS OF THE YEAR AND
SNAP CAN BE A PROTECTIVE FACTOR
AGAINST FOOD INSECURITY.
SO I THINK SOME OF OUR FOLKS
YOU KNOW AND ALSO SOME OF OUR
FOOD PLACES ARE, YOU KNOW, ON
THE VERY EDGE OF TOWN AND CAN
BE HARD YOU KNOW, DIFFICULT TO
GET TO AND ARE FACING THEIR OWN
FUNDING CHALLENGES AS WELL.
>> SO YOU KNOW, JUST MY MY
HYPOTHESES.
>> THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
SORRY.
>> SO TO ME YOUR FINDINGS SEEM
VERY RICH.
I THINK THAT YOU WERE ABLE TO
OFFER INSIGHT INTO THIS
QUESTION ABOUT FOOD INSECURITY
AND THAT YOU REPORT PEOPLE'S
SENSE OF SELF AND PERHAPS
EFFICACY.
>> YES.
BEING AIDED THOSE ARE
SIGNIFICANT AND SO I WONDER IF
IT'S POSSIBLE TO SET SOME
EXPECTATIONS ABOUT SAID SOME
DIFFERENT EXPECTATIONS.
I THINK PEOPLE GO INTO THIS
KIND OF THING THINKING OH YEAH,
WE'RE GOING TO SEE
THAT YOU
KNOW, THIS MONEY REALLY HELPS
AND YOU KNOW, THEY HAVE A NEW
HOUSE AND A NEW CAR.
I'M JUST KIDDING.
BUT I THINK MAYBE THE
EXPECTATIONS COULD BE MADE MORE
REALISTIC AND THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF WHAT YOU ARE FINDING FOR
PEOPLE COULD BE UNDERSCORED
RATHER THAN FEELING LIKE OH I
KNOW YOU'RE GOING TO HEAR THIS
BUT I CAN TELL YOU THAT SO IT'S
REALLY JUST A THOUGHT.
>> YEAH, NO THANK FOR THAT.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE
QUALITATIVE FOLKS ON THE TEAM
THAT SPEAKS TO ME AND I DO
THINK AS A WHOLE THE GUARANTEED
INCOME MOVEMENT HAS KIND
OF EXPECTED GUARANTEED INCOME
TO DO EVERYTHING LIKE THE
THEORY OF CHANGE IS SO BROAD,
YOU KNOW, LIKE IT'S SUPPOSED TO
SOLVE FOOD INSECURITY.
IT'S SUPPOSED TO MAKE PEOPLE
HEALTHIER.
IT'S YOU KNOW, JUST EVERYTHING
THAT YOU CAN IMAGINE AND THEN
WHEN IT DOESN'T AND OTHER
PILOTS FIND IT SOMETIMES
DOESN'T.
YEAH.
THEN THERE'S SOME REAL
DISAPPOINTMENT BUT WHAT PEOPLE
TELL US IN THE INTERVIEWS TO ME
IS VERY MEANINGFUL AND THAT
THIS IS, YOU KNOW, JUST FEELING
LIKE THEY'RE PART OF THE
COMMUNITY, YOU KNOW, I THINK IS
SOMETHING WE WANT TO ENCOURAGE
THAT WE CAN TALK ABOUT WANTING
TO REACH FOR THIS ASSUMINGLY IN
TERMS OF HOW THOSE
COMMUNICATIONS ARE GOING DOWN
THIS FALL.
WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO FEEL
LIKE A VALUED MEMBER.
YES.
AND IT'S DISAPPOINTING THAT
THIS IS NOT SOMETHING NEW GOING
ON.
I HOPE THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF CARE THAT GOES INTO THOSE
COMMUNICATIONS AS THEY'RE GOING
OUT BECAUSE I'M SURE IT'S
DIFFICULT TO THOSE GET TO THE
END OF SOMETHING THAT THEY
ALWAYS KNEW IT'S GOING BE
TEMPORARY BUT NEVERTHELESS
YEAH.
YEAH, THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT
IS MUCH MORE CHALLENGING RIGHT
NOW AND THOSE SOURCES HAVE
BECOME SO IT IS GREAT THAT WE
CAN DIRECT PEOPLE TOWARDS THE
RESOURCES AND THE PROGRAMS WE
HAVE WON'T BE LIKE THIS.
BUT YOU KNOW, I THINK WE WANT
TO BE ABLE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT
WE STILL ARE A CARING COMMUNITY
AND TRY TO COMMUNICATE TO THAT.
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY.
I MEAN DURING SORT OF THE
INITIAL OUTREACH AND DURING THE
APPLICATION PROCESS IN
SELECTING PEOPLE ARE OUR
MONITOR WAS LIKE, YOU KNOW, WE
ARE TREATING PEOPLE AS OUR
NEIGHBORS AND AND ALSO WE ARE
GOING TO MAKE THIS EXPERIENCE
THE LEAST BURDENSOME KIND
OF EXPERIENCE THEY'VE HAD IN
TERMS OF RECEIVING ANY KIND
OF BENEFIT AND WE'VE TRIED TO
CARRY THAT THROUGH, YOU KNOW,
ANSWER EMAILS WITHIN AN HOUR,
THOSE SORTS OF THINGS.
SO WE DO TRY TO BE VERY
RESPONSIVE AND THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
YOU SO NEXT UP, WILL BE MR.
HERBERT TO TALK ABOUT TREE LINE
SIDES WITH YOU, SIR.
GOOD EVENING, MAYOR TAYLOR,
CITY COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVES
AND CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
TONY, THANK YOU FOR THIS
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO INTRODUCE
AND OR UPDATE YOU ON THE TREE
TRAIL.
I'M NORMAN HERBERT.
I SERVE IN THE CAPACITY AS
CO-CHAIR FOR THE BOARD OF THE
TREE LINE CONSERVANCY ON BEHALF
OF THE CONSERVANCY WE WISH TO
EXPRESS OUR APPRECIATION FOR
THE SUPPORT THAT'S BEEN
PROVIDED FROM THE OFFICE OF THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR AS WE
CONTINUE TO PURSUE THE VISION
OF TRANSFORMING THE HISTORIC
ALLEN CREEK INTO MULTI TRAIL
AND GREEN CORRIDOR.
>> OUR VISION FOR THE TRAIL
BACK THIS UP JUST A BIT.
OUR VISION FOR THE TRAIL IS TO
CONNECT TO HURON RIVER TO
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR AS WELL AS
THE UNIVERSITY S CAMPUS WHERE
NEW STUDENT HOUSING IS BEING
INTRODUCED.
AND REALLY WHAT WE WANT TO DO
IS TO WEAVE TOGETHER DIVERSE
NEIGHBORHOODS, PROMOTE
ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP AND
ENHANCE THE ECONOMIC AND
CULTURAL VITALITY EVENT HARBOR
NOW AND FOR GENERATIONS TO COME
OVER THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS
WE'VE MADE STEADY PROGRESS ON
PLANTING THE TREE LINE AND
SECURING THE NECESSARY PROPERTY
AND RIGHTS OF WAY TO BUILD IT.
THE TREE LINE CONSERVANCY
ACQUIRED FOR 10 MILLION WHICH
RUNS FROM FELT TO MILLER AND
PLANS TO USE AND WE ALSO PLAN
TO USE THE CITY EASEMENT
THROUGH THE FLOODWAY AT BOTH
SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH MAIN
STREET AS WELL AS 415 WEST
WASHINGTON FOR THE TRAIL.
THE TREE LINE CONSERVANCY IS
ALSO REQUIRED PROSELYTE TO A
CAPN WHICH WILL SERVE AS A
CONNECTOR FROM THE TRAIL TO
WEST PARK UNDER THE TWENTY
NINETEEN COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY
VANDERBURG AND THE TREE LINE
CONSERVANCY THE CITY WILL
ULTIMATELY BE THE TITLE HOLDER
OF THE TREE LINE TRAIL ASSETS
415 WHICH WASHINGTON CURRENTLY
HAS A TEMPORARY SWIFT TRAIL SO
A NEW NAME WHICH IS BETWEEN
THIS TRAIL RUNS BETWEEN WEST
WASHINGTON AND WEST LIBERTY TO
DEMONSTRATE WHAT IS REQUIRED TO
RECONDITION THE SOIL TO
ENCOURAGE POLLINATOR PLANTS IN
THE SUPPORT OF THE CHIMNEY.
SWIFTS THEN INHABIT THE CHIMNEY
AT 450 IN WEST WASHINGTON IN
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THE TREE
LINE CONSERVANCY ESTABLISHED A
COMMITTEE WHICH INCLUDED
COMMUNITY REPRESENTATIVES TO
ENGAGE WITH INFORMED STUDIO AND
UNDERSTANDING THE FEASIBILITY
OF THE PROPOSED TREE ALIGNMENT
FROM THE HURON RIVER TO SEVEN
TWENTY ONE NORTHMEAD STREET THE
CITY'S MAINTENANCE YARD IN
SUPPORT OF CONVERSATIONS WITH
STAKEHOLDERS THE TREE LINE
CONSERVER TO RETAINED INFORMED
STUDIO TO DEVELOP A CONCEPT I
PUT EMPHASIS ON THE CONCEPT
OF THE TREE LINE TRAIL
UNDERSTANDING THAT A JOINT RFP
WITH THE CITY WOULD BE REQUIRED
TO ENGAGE A CONSULTANT TO
ENGINEER AND DESIGN THE
PROPOSED TRAIL FROM THE RIVER
TO SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH MAIN
STREET.
THE CONCEPT FROM INFORMED
STUDIO HAS BEEN QUITE
BENEFICIAL IN THE NEGOTIATIONS
WITH MCGRAIL AND AMTRAC AND
PROPERTY STAKEHOLDERS IN THE
NORTHERN SECTION SO THAT ALL
PARTIES HAVE AN UNDERSTANDING
OF THE POTENTIAL FOR THE
PROPOSED TRAIL.
THE PRELIMINARY AGREEMENTS HAVE
BEEN SECURED FROM SOME OF THE
KEY STAKEHOLDERS PERMITTING US
NOW TO REQUEST CITY COUNCIL
APPROVALS MOVE TO MOVE FORWARD
WITH AN RFP FOR AN ENGINEERING
AND DESIGN OF THE GATEWAY
BRIDGE AND TRAIL.
THIS PROCESS TO GET TO THIS
POINT HAS TAKEN US BETTER THAN
THREE YEARS THE TREE LINE
CONSERVATIVE REFERRING TO
NORTHERN SECTION AS THE GATEWAY
IT SERVES AS THE KEY ENTRY INTO
OUR WHOLE COMMUNITY TO THE
DOWNTOWN TO MYSHKIN MEDICINE
AND THE UNIVERSITY'S HEALTH
CARE CENTER AS WELL AS WATER
HEALTH.
IT IS A TRUE GATEWAY TO ALL
OF THESE KEY FEATURES OF THE
COMMUNITY AND OUR GOAL IS TO
PROVIDE AN ESSENTIAL FEATURE
OF THE TREE LINE AND THAT IS
OUR SIGNATURE BRIDGE AND ALSO
TO MARK THE GATEWAY WITH
DISTINCTION AND BEAUTY AND THE
WOW FACTOR.
THE GATEWAY SECTION IS DEPICTED
ON THIS PARTICULAR TRAIL TREE
LINE TRAIL EXHIBIT AND IT SHOWS
THE PROPOSED TRAIL IN RELATION
TO THE ALLEN CREEK CULVERT .
IF YOU'RE NOT AWARE THE ALLEN
CREEK CULVERT HAS BEEN IN
EXISTENCE FOR ABOUT 100 HUNDRED
YEARS AND IT IS NOT TO BE BUILT
OVER IT IS CRITICAL THAT ACCESS
IS AVAILABLE SHOULD MAINTENANCE
BE REQUIRED TO WORKING WITH
INFORMED STUDIO.
WE WANTED TO CONFIRM THAT THE
PATH OF THE TRAIL WHICH YOU SEE
HERE IN GRAY IS FEASIBLE AND
WE'VE DETERMINED THAT IT IS AND
ADJUSTMENTS CAN BE MADE AS
NEEDED.
>> ANOTHER VIEW OF THIS THE
GATEWAY SECTION GOING FROM THE
RAILROAD OR THE RIVER TO SEVEN
TWENTY ONE IF YOU FOLLOW THE
WHITE TRAIL THAT IS WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT IS OUR GATEWAY
SECTION AND PARALLELS THE EXIT
FROM THE DEPOT TUNNEL THAT RUNS
DOWN ALONG THE RAILROAD AND
WHERE IT BEGINS TO MAKE THAT
TURN.
WE'RE NOW GOING ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY AND THAT'S WHERE WE
BEGIN TO ELEVATE TO GO ACROSS
IN MORE SOUTHERLY DIRECTION
FROM THE RAILROAD TOWARD DEPOT
AND SOME STREAMS IT WOULD BE
ELEVATED AND STARTING AT, IF
YOU WILL, THE EDGE THERE TO THE
RAILROAD TO APPROACH THE
SIGNATURE BRIDGE.
THIS REPRESENTS WHAT WE
REFERRED TO AS THE SIGNATURE
BRIDGE THIS IS A PARTICULAR
CONCEPT THAT IS WHAT WE CALL A
ALAM GREG PUTS THE WOOD WHITLAM
SORRY IT'S WOOD LAMINATED TRAIL
BRIDGE THAT WOULD CROSS NORTH
MAIN STREET AND YOU'LL ALSO SEE
ON THIS EXHIBIT THAT THERE IS
AN UNDERCURRENT TO THE PATH
THAT WE'RE ALSO VERY SENSITIVE
TO BECAUSE FROM A PEDESTRIAN
STANDPOINT ON NORTH MAIN WE
WANTED TO BE SURE THAT THAT
ALSO IS APPEALING.
THIS IS ANOTHER VIEW AGAIN
OF THE BRIDGE BUT FROM ON TOP
GOING FROM THE NORTH TOWARDS
THE SOUTH AND THIS PARTICULAR
EXHIBIT CONCEPT IS A STAINLESS
STEEL.
SO AGAIN THESE ARE SIMPLY
CONCEPTS TO INFORM THE
DISCUSSION OUR NEXT STEPS, OUR
OPPORTUNITY TO ATTRACT
FINANCIAL GRANTS AND
CONTRIBUTIONS IS DEPENDENT ON
DEMONSTRATING CONTINUED
MOMENTUM REALLY A PROJECT THAT
CONTINUES TO PROCEED.
AMTRAK HAS EXECUTED DESIGN
PHASE AGREEMENT WITH THE TREE
LINE CONSERVANCY WHICH
INDICATES THEIR WILLINGNESS TO
REVIEW AND ENGINEER DESIGN
TRAIL FROM THE HURON RIVER TO
SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH MAIN.
THIS WILLINGNESS ON THE PART
OF MCGRAIL AND AMTRAK TO REVIEW
IN ENGINEERED DESIGN RAIL HAS
ALLOWED FOR THE PRELIMINARY
AGREEMENTS WITH PRIVATE
PROPERTY OWNERS AND FOR THE
TRAIL TO CROSS THEIR PROPERTY
NOW TO PROCEED WITH THE
ENGAGEMENT OF A CONSULTANT TO
DO THE NEEDED ENGINEERING
DESIGN UNDER THE TWENTY
NINETEEN COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT THE JOINTLY ISSUED
RFP WOULD ENABLE US TO SECURE
THE NEEDED ENGINEERING AND
DESIGN SERVICES.
MANY MAJOR GRANTS ARE DEPENDENT
ON BEING SHOVEL READY AND TO BE
SHOVEL READY IN ENGINEER DESIGN
GATEWAY TRAIL NOW MUST BE
OBTAINED FOR CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL IS REQUIRED IN ORDER
FOR US TO ISSUE AN RFP FOR THIS
GATEWAY SECTION OF THE PROPOSED
TREE LINE TRAIL.
THAT'S THE EXTENT OF MY
PARTICULAR FORMAL PRESENTATION.
I'D BE HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN
QUESTIONS
.
YES, THANK.
COULD YOU POSSIBLY GO BACK TO
THE MAP SLIDE?
YEAH THERE SO I JUST NOTICED
THE PROXIMITY TO THE BORDER TO
BORDER TRAIL.
I WONDER IF THERE'S ANY PLAN
FOR EASY CONNECTION THERE
BETWEEN THE TWO?
YES, THERE IS VERY DEFINITELY.
THANK YOU FOR THAT QUESTION.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE SECTION THAT
JUST ABOVE THE INFORM STUDIO
SAYS BE TO BE TRAIL THAT IS THE
CONNECTION FROM THE EXISTING
EXIT OF THE BERM TUNNEL IF YOU
WILL THEN TOWARD THE B B TRAIL
AND WE WILL DEFINITELY CONNECT
THERE NEAR AAGOT DAM BECAUSE
YOU KNOW, THERE'S A NEW BRIDGE
THAT'S BEEN INSTALLED THAT WILL
MAKE ACCESS TO THE B TO B
TRAIL.
THAT BRIDGE WAS INSTALLED AS
PART OF THE BROADWAY PARK WEST
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT.
THANK YOU.
AND THEN OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN YOU
CAN SEE IT HERE IN A FEW OF THE
RENDERINGS AS WELL THAT THAT
KIND OF THE ELEVATED PORTION
OF THE TRAIL GETS FAIRLY CLOSE
TO SOME HOMES THAT ARE THERE
RIGHT NOW.
ARE YOU DOING ANY EXISTING
ENGAGEMENT WITH KIND OF THOSE
THAT MIGHT BE MOST IMPACTED BY
KIND OF A STRUCTURE GOING UP
RIGHT NEXT DOOR TO THEIR HOME?
WE ARE THAT THAT APPLY IN
PARTICULAR TO THE PROPERTY
BETWEEN DEPOT AND SUMMER
STREETS AND WE'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS FOCUSED RIGHT NOW
ON THE EIGHT HUNDRED NORTH MAIN
.
BUT WE DO INTEND AS PART OF THE
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO
APPROACH THE OTHER PROPERTY
OWNERS IN THAT AREA.
>> YES, ALL OF THE PARTIES THAT
HAVE INDICATED AGREEMENT WHICH
ARE VERY LONG MAIN THAT
ENCOMPASSES NIÑOS SIX NINE
TWELVE AND NINE TWENTY FOUR
THEY'VE ALL PROVIDED THE
AGREEMENT.
THEY KNOW WHAT WE'RE PLANNING
TO DO HERE AND ARE VERY MUCH IN
SUPPORT OF THIS PROJECT THANKS
TO THE PRESENTATION AND I KNOW
KIND OF STATED THIS PLACE
WANTED TO MAKE IT EVEN MORE
EXPLICIT IN TERMS OF WHAT YOU
NEED FROM CITY COUNCIL NEXT ITS
APPROVAL TO BE ABLE TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH ENGAGEMENT WITH
END UP WITH MY DAUGHTER AMTRAC
KNOW REALLY WHAT WE NEED
HAMDARD RAIL AND AMTRAK ARE
BOTH ON BOARD AND WE HAVE AN
EXECUTED AGREEMENT DESIGN PHASE
AGREEMENT WITH AMTRAK IN PLACE
AND IT HAS SORT OF COSIGNED
GIVEN SAW THEIR INDICATION
OF APPROVAL.
WHAT WE NEED NOW IS TO BE ABLE
TO DO THE RFP SO THAT WE'VE GOT
A PROJECT THAT REALLY BEGINS TO
COME TOGETHER.
>> WE'VE GOT THE PROPERTY
OWNERS AGREE AND ON THIS RFP I
KNOW THAT YOU THE ORGANIZATION
HAS DONE A LOT OF FUNDRAISING
AND IS IN A STRONG FINANCIAL
FOOTING TO BE TO DO THAT.
AND SO THE THE PEACE HERE IS
KIND OF A PARTNERSHIP BUT THE
FUNDING AT THIS POINT IS COMING
FROM FROM THE NONPROFIT FUNDING
THE FUNDING FOR THE FUTURE FUND
ENGAGEMENT CONSULTING AND
DESIGN WORK NEEDS TO COME AND
DO THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT
FROM THE TREE LINE CONSERVANCY
AND TO THE EXTENT TO WHICH
FEDERAL FUNDS MIGHT BE
AVAILABLE.
WE WORK WITH THE CITY DIRECTLY
AGAIN THE OFFICE OF THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR ASSISTS AND DOES
THE REVIEW OF ANY THOSE GRANTS
THAT ARE SUBMITTED FOR FEDERAL
FUNDING SUPPORT AND AS FOLKS
MAY KNOW MY DAY JOB IS WITH
RAILS TO TRAILS CONSERVANCY SO
I AM A LITTLE BIT PRO TRAIL AND
OTHER MODES OF ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
I CAN CONFIRM THAT MY RECENT
CONVERSATIONS WITH USA DOT
SUGGEST THAT THEY ARE STILL
FRIENDLY NOT ALWAYS SO ON
STRAIGHT ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
FRIENDLY RIGHT NOW BUT ALREADY
IS IS A GOOD PLACE TO BE.
YEAH THAT'S CORRECT.
THANK YOU FOR THE QUESTIONS.
CUSTOMER.
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION.
THAT WAS WONDERFUL.
I DO HAVE A QUESTION ON THE
RENDERING THAT'S UP ON THE
SCREEN RIGHT NOW.
IT SHOWS THE TRAIL IS GOING
OVER DEPOT PARK.
DO YOU REQUIRE ANY APPROVAL OR
ANYTHING FROM THE CITY PERHAPS
THIS IS MORE OF A QUESTION FOR
OUR ILLUSTRATOR BUT JUST GOING
THROUGH CITY PARK LAND I'M
CURIOUS IF THERE'S ANY
OBSTACLES THERE IN THE
DISCUSSIONS THAT WE'VE HAD WITH
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR, TONY,
THERE IS AN INDICATION
OF SUPPORT WE HAVEN'T ASKED FOR
IN A FORMAL WAY BUT I'M
ANTICIPATING THAT IT WILL
CONTINUE TO MOVE US FORWARD.
WE OBVIOUSLY NEED TO CROSS CITY
STREETS FOR THAT.
WE NEED AGAIN ALL PART OF BUT
THE THE ENGINEERED OR DESIGNED
PROPOSAL WILL ULTIMATELY COME
BACK TO CITY COUNCIL FOR
APPROVAL AS A PROJECT BEFORE IT
BEFORE IT GOES TO BID.
GREAT.
THANK YOU FOR THEIR QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU.
GOOD TO SEE AN UPDATE ON THIS
AND I KNOW I'VE TALKED WITH YOU
MANY TIMES TO TALK THROUGH THE
DESIGN.
I'M CURIOUS LOOKING WITH THE
LATEST THINKING AS YOU KNOW
THIS GOES OVER A LOT OF AREAS.
I WOULD HOPE YOU'RE NOT JUST
ENTERING AT ONE END AND BEING
DEPOSITED AT THE OTHER.
SO HOW ARE YOU THINKING ABOUT
DIFFERENT SPOTS WHERE YOU CAN
GET ON AND OFF THE TRAIL THE AT
THE BAND IF YOU WILL COMING OFF
THE RAILROAD THAT WHICH ISN'T
WHITE THAT PARALLELS THE
EXISTING PATH FROM THE DEPOT
TUNNEL BURM TUNNEL THAT AREA IS
EXISTING IS THE EXISTING CITY
AGREEMENT WITH RAIL AND ALL
WE'VE ASKED FOR AND THEY'VE
GRANTED PERMISSION FOR WOULD BE
TO EXTEND THAT TO WHERE WE CAN
MAKE THAT TURN.
IF YOU FOLLOW ME WITH THAT TURN
WE INTEND FOR THAT TO BE A NICE
GREEN AREA.
THE PARK IS ONE AREA FOR ACCESS
TO THE TRAIL THEN AND IF YOU
WILL NINE OH SIX NORTH LANE WE
WOULD ENVISION ANOTHER ACCESS
POINT AND IT WOULD BE A THIRD
ACCESS POINT AT SEVEN TWENTY
ONE TO THE EXTENT WE CAN DO SO
WE WOULD INTRODUCE A POTENTIAL
ELEVATOR IN THE BLOCK BETWEEN
DEPOT AND SUMMIT STREET THAT'S
ALSO GOING TO BE AN ECONOMIC
ISSUE BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE VERY MUCH INTERESTED IN
SO AS TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO ALL
.
SO LOTS OF OPTIONS FOR US TO
CONSIDER.
WE DON'T HAVE ANYTHING
DEFINITIVE BUT EVERYTHING WE'VE
DONE HAS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT THE
NEEDS UNDER ADA REQUIREMENTS TO
MAKE IT ACCESSIBLE CUSTOMER.
>> I'M GLAD THAT CONSUMER
RAGMAN ASK THAT QUESTION
BECAUSE I'M LOOKING AT IT TOO
AND TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW
THAT WORKS.
SO WHERE DOES IT START TO
ELEVATE AFTER THE BEND IT
BASICALLY STARTS AT THE POINT
OF THAT BEND.
YEAH, BECAUSE WE NEED TO GET TO
16 FEET HIGH ONE OF THE
DRAWBACKS TO SOME OF THE OTHER
OPTIONS THAT WERE CONSIDERED
THROUGH THE ALIGNMENT STUDY IS
THAT IF WE WOULD HAVE
CONSIDERED COMING OUT OF THE
POND WHICH WAS ORIGINALLY
PROPOSED WHEN THE CITY MASTER
PLAN WAS ADOPTED, WE WOULD HAVE
HAD TO GO UP THIRTY SIX FEET.
WE WOULD HAVE GONE WOULD HAVE
HAD TO GO ACROSS BOTH THE
RAILROAD AS WELL AS NORTHMAN
AND INTERSECT WITH WHEEL WELL.
THANK YOU.
WELL THAT'S FROM OUR STANDPOINT
SEEMED AWFUL HIGH AND OUR
PREFERENCE WAS NOT TO HAVE A
SECOND STRUCTURE IN THAT AREA
WHICH IS THE REASON WE FOCUSED
ON USING THE BERM TUNNEL AS A
POINT OF DEPARTURE FOR THE
PROPOSED TREE LINE TRAIL.
>> SO IF I'M A CYCLIST I GO
THROUGH THE TUNNEL AND THEN I
GET ON THE TREE LINE TRAIL AND
I GO WELL YOU COME THROUGH THE
TUNNEL YOU'LL COME UP AS YOU
SEE 201 DEPOSITARY YOU COME UP
TO ABOUT A HALFWAY POINT
OF THAT BUILDING NEED TO MAKE
180 DEGREE TURN AND THEN
STAYING AT GRADE BECAUSE ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WAS
IMPORTANT IN OUR CONVERSATIONS
WITH AMTRAK IS SAFETY FOR THE
PEDESTRIANS IN THE TRAINS THAT
GO BY AND WE WOULD INSTALL A
REMOVABLE FENCE SO THAT ONLY IN
THOSE INSTANCES WHEN
MAINTENANCE MAINTENANCE OF THE
TRACK IS REQUIRED WE WOULD
REMOVE THAT FENCE, THEY COULD
DO THE MAINTENANCE AND WE'D PUT
THE FENCE BACK UP AND SAFETY
WOULD BE MAINTAINED.
BUT AT THAT POINT WE WOULD BE
AT GRADE AND THEN ONLY BEGIN TO
ELEVATE ONCE WE GET, IF YOU
WILL, BACK TO THE PRIVATE
PROPERTY AT THAT ELBOW.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
OTHER QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
FOR
YOUR SO THE
OF OUR PANEL TOPIC OF THE NIGHT
IS TO GIVE A REPORT BASED ON
OUR WORKING RELATIONSHIP WITH
CBRE.
WE'RE TRYING TO GET TO A POINT
TO TURN A PAGE.
LET ME TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
PROCESS SO YOU UNDERSTAND WHAT
HAPPENED.
SO TONIGHT YOU WILL HEAR A
SUMMARY OF THE TOP OFFERS THAT
WE HAVE RECEIVED FOR BOTH KLEIN
LOT AND FOR 15.
WE'RE NOT ASKING YOU TO MAKE
ANY DECISIONS TONIGHT.
WE'RE SIMPLY SHARING
INFORMATION THE ADMINISTRATION
WILL COME BACK TO YOU IN
SEPTEMBER WITH THE RESOLUTION
PROBABLY TWO DIFFERENT ONES
UNLESS I CAN CONVINCE MISCA TO
LET US COMBINE THEM SO THAT WE
CAN MOVE ON WITH THE PLAN ON
NEGOTIATION, IF YOU WILL, FOR
THE TRANSACTION THE SUMMARIES
THAT YOU WILL SEE TONIGHT HAS
THE IDENTITY OF THE BITTER
SEALED TO KEEP IT A LEVEL
PLAYING FIELD.
SO THERE ARE THREE
REPRESENTATIVES HERE FROM KLY
FROM CBRE THAT WE'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH MISS AND RAHM WHO
IS THE BEEN THE POINT PERSON
HANK CARPENTER AND JACK
JOHNSON.
WE HAVE BEEN MEETING WITH THEM
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF THIS.
YOU SEE THE CLIENT A LOT ON THE
SCREEN.
IT'S ACTUALLY SIX DIFFERENT
PARCELS.
FIVE OF THEM WERE ACQUIRED
THROUGH A COMBINATION IN
NINETEEN NINETY FOUR THREE
HUNDRED EIGHTEEN THOUSAND AND
THE SIX ONE FOUR ONE HUNDRED
AND FORTY NINE THOUSAND WE GET
NO TAX REVENUE FROM THE PARCEL
TODAY THE DDA MANAGES THE SITE
FOR THE CITY AS A SURFACE
PARKING LOT THERE IS ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS IN ANNUAL PARKING
REVENUE WE GET TWENTY PERCENT
AND SO THAT'S THAT'S OUR
PORTION OF THE TAKE FOR FIFTEEN
WEST WASHINGTON WAS BUILT
NINETEEN TWENTY FIVE ACQUIRED
BY THE CITY IN NINETEEN SIXTY
FIVE.
NO TAX REVENUE BEING GENERATED
BY THAT SITE EITHER.
WE GET ABOUT FIFTEEN THOUSAND
DOLLARS OF ANNUAL PARKING
REVENUE FROM THE DDA SO THOSE
ARE THE TWO SITES COUNCIL
RESOLUTION THAT WAS PASSED BACK
IN FEBRUARY OF THIS YEAR.
OUR TEAM HAS BEEN MEETING EVERY
OTHER WEEK WITH CBRE
PROFESSIONALS THE DEADLINE FOR
SUBMITTING PROPOSALS WAS ON
JUNE THE 20TH AND THIS PROCESS
HAS GONE REMARKABLY FAST.
THEY WILL TALK ABOUT THE
PROCESS THEY WENT THROUGH TO
CONNECT WITH THE MARKETPLACE.
THE OFFERS CAME IN RELATIVELY
QUICKLY AND SO WE'RE GLAD TO BE
AT THIS POINT IN THE PROCESS.
SO WITH THAT, IF YOU COULD
BRING UP THE CBRE PROPOSAL FROM
POWER AND THEN I WAS GIVEN A
PDF BEFORE THE START OF THIS
YEAR IS BEST FOR YOU?
WELL, WHICHEVER ONE YOU WANT DO
YOU WANT TO THE PDF FIND THE
PEDIATRIC SIGN ON THAT OF THE
POWER POINTS THERE?
I JUST GOT THE PDF RIGHT BEFORE
THE SESSION STARTED
.
SO THE ONE THAT I WAS GIVEN
EARLIER AT FOUR THIRTY TODAY IS
THE POWERPOINT OK WHAT I HAVE
THAT'S GREAT AND GOOD EVENING.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING US.
MY NAME IS ARAM.
I'M WITH SEABURY.
WE'RE A LARGE COMMERCIAL REAL
ESTATE FIRM.
I'M HERE WITH MY TWO COLLEAGUES
HANK CARPENTER, JACK JONTE.
WE'VE HAD A WONDERFUL WORKING
RELATIONSHIP SO FAR IT HAS BEEN
A TREAT BECAUSE IT'S A VERY
IMPORTANT PROJECT.
WE KNOW IT'S GENERATIONAL
TRANSFORMATIONAL SO IT'S BEEN
VERY IMPORTANT TO US AS WELL.
AS MILTON SAID WE KICKED THIS
OFF I THINK IN FEBRUARY AND
I'VE HAD CADENCE OF EVERY OTHER
WEEK SPEAKING WITH THE CITY AND
WE COLLECTED INFORMATION,
UNDERSTOOD THE CITY'S
OBJECTIVES AND THEN WE
CREATED MARKETING MATERIALS AND
RAN TWO DIFFERENT PROCESSES FOR
THE PROPERTIES SPECIFIC TO
CLIENTS LOT AND FOR ONE FIVE
WASHINGTON WE WENT OUT TO THE
MARKET APRIL 8TH ON OUR
PROPRIETARY WEBSITE WE DO IT'S
CALLED DEAL FLOW PROPRIETARY TO
SEABURY WE WENT OUT TO ABOUT
THIRTY THREE THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED INVESTORS AND
DEVELOPERS WORLDWIDE AND THEN
WE ALSO PUT IT ON WHAT YOU
PROBABLY HEARD OF COSTAR
LOOPNET AS OUR DIFFERENT
MARKETING PLATFORMS.
SO WE HAD FOUR OFFERS JUNE 12TH
AND WE WERE VERY, VERY PLEASED
WITH THE RESULTS.
WE RECEIVED NINE OFFERS ON
CLIENTS AND WE RECEIVED FIVE
OFFERS ON FOUR ONE FIVE WEST
WASHINGTON AND THAT'S A VERY
THAT'S A VERY STRONG NUMBERS
CONSIDERING THE CAPITAL MARKETS
ENVIRONMENT THAT'S GOING ON
RIGHT NOW.
SO KEEP GOING AND HOPE THIS
WORKS HERE AGAIN.
YEAH.
HUH.
OK, WE'RE GOING TO COVER CLINES
LOT FIRST AND SO THIS IS JUST A
DASHBOARD THAT SHOWS YOU OUR
DISTRIBUTION AGAIN WE WENT OUT
TO THIRTY THREE THOUSAND SOME
FORTY SEVEN TO FORTY PERCENT
OF THEM ACTUALLY VIEWED THE
EMAIL.
BELIEVE IT OR NOT THAT'S
ACTUALLY A VERY STRONG NUMBER
AND SO WITH THOSE NUMBERS YOU
CAN READ THEM.
I CAN SEE THAT NOW BUT THEY
VIEW THE EMAIL FIFTEEN THOUSAND
AND THEN ULTIMATELY THEY
DOWNLOADED DOCUMENTS THAT WERE
KEY TO THE OFFERING.
>> THERE WERE SIXTY SIX PARTIES
THAT DID THAT
TO MY KIDS HERE
TO DO THIS.
>> OK, SO AGAIN WE RECEIVED
NINE OFFERS ON CLINES LOT WE
PICKED FOR MOST QUALIFIED
OFFERS AND THEN WE'RE LISTING
THEM HERE.
WE'LL GO THROUGH THEM ONE BY
ONE WITHOUT ANY NAMES BUT I'LL
JUST GO THROUGH THE TYPICAL
PROCESSES QUITE QUICKLY.
WE RECEIVED THE ALAWI WE ASKED
FOR A BEST AND FINAL FOR THEM
TO SHARPEN THEIR PENCIL TO
SHARPEN THEIR OFFERS, ANSWER
QUESTIONS AND THEN SO THE PRICE
SAID THAT YOU'LL SEE HERE AFTER
A BEST AND FINAL ROUND WE THEN
WILL YOU WILL ULTIMATELY AWARD
TO A PARTICULAR DEVELOPER WE
WILL SIGN A POST PURCHASE AND
SALE AGREEMENT AT THAT TIME YOU
WILL RECEIVE ERNEST MONIZ FROM
THE DEVELOPER AND THEN THEY GET
TO WORK WITH A TYPICAL DUE
PERIOD.
WHAT CAN BE FROM 30 DAYS TO 90
DAYS CAN BE LONGER DEPENDING ON
THE COMPLEXITY OF THE PROJECT
AFTER DUE DILIGENCE SOME
OF THESE LINES CROSS AROUND
HERE BECAUSE THERE'S THIS SORT
OF ESTIMATED TIME PERIOD
OF CITY APPROVALS
OF ENTITLEMENTS, ZONING, THINGS
OF THAT NATURE CONCEPTUAL PLANS
AND THEN THE ACTUAL CLOSING
PERIOD IS WHERE THE DEVELOPER
IS SECURING FINANCING,
CONSTRUCTION FINANCING,
PERMANENT FINANCING, EQUITY
PARTNERSHIPS AND THEN ALSO
SLOWLY BUT SURELY PULLING
PERMITS AND GETTING TO WORK.
SO THAT'S THAT'S THE TIME
PERIOD WE'RE GOING TO TALK
ABOUT IN THESE OFFERS.
SO OFFER A AS A TWELVE MILLION
DOLLAR PRICE AND THEY ARE
WILLING TO PUT THREE HUNDRED
TWENTY FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS
DOWN THEIR DUE DILIGENCE PERIOD
WHERE AGAIN YOU'RE LOOKING FOR
THEY'RE INITIATING OR REVIEWING
THIRD PARTY REPORTS PHASE ONE
PHASE TWO IS BASELINES PROPERTY
CONDITION REPORTS, THINGS
OF THAT NATURE SO THAT DUE
DILIGENCE PERIOD OF 60 DAYS
HERE THEY ARE ESTIMATED THE
CITY IS GOING TO TAKE SIX
HUNDRED FIVE DAYS FOR APPROVAL
PROCESS THAT CAN BE A LOT
SHORTER.
THEY IT'S REALLY IN THE HANDS
OF THE CITY AT THAT POINT AND
THEN THE CLOSING PERIOD I
MENTIONED IS FORTY FIVE DAYS
FOR THESE FOLKS.
SO BEGINNING TO END THEY
ESTIMATE SEVEN HUNDRED AND TEN
DAYS FROM SIGNING OF A PURCHASE
AND SALE AGREEMENT TO CLOSE
THEY ARE PROPOSING TWO HUNDRED
SEVENTY TWO UNITS AND ALL FOUR
CLIENTS THAT THESE ARE ALL
BASICALLY HIGH QUALITY
MULTIFAMILY RENTAL UNITS AND
THEN WE'LL HAVE A RETAIL
COMPONENT INVOLVED.
THEY ARE PROPOSING TWELVE
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET RETAIL.
NONE OF THESE REALLY SPECIFY
WHAT RETAIL BUT THE TYPICAL
WOULD BE FITNESS CENTERS,
THINGS OF THAT NATURE THAT ARE
CONDUCIVE TO THE TO THE LIVING
AND SURROUNDING
COMMUNITY
OF RETAIL POTENTIAL PARKING
HERE TWO HUNDRED STALLS AND
THEY ARE WILLING TO DISCUSS
ANOTHER HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE
FOR PUBLIC PARKING TO SERVE THE
CITY CONTINGENCIES THESE FOLKS
DO HAVE A CONTINGENCY BASED ON
APPROVAL OF BROWNFIELD PROPERTY
TAX ABATEMENTS AND THEN
SUSTAINABILITY.
THE LEVEL SET ON SUSTAINABILITY
AND CLIENTS LOT IS THAT THEY
ALL ARE AWARE THAT THIS IS A
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT ELECTRIC
SERVICE PROPERTY SO NO ONE IS
COMING IN BELOW THAT LINE SO WE
CALL THAT MODERATE ANYTHING
ABOVE THAT THAT THEY'RE GOING
OF OVER ABOVE AND BEYOND GREEN
ROOFS LEED CERTIFICATION, SOLAR
PANELS, ZERO NET EMISSIONS
COMPLETE COMPLIANCE WITH ANN
ARBOR ZONED THE WHOLE THING
THAT WOULD BE A HIGH CATEGORY.
THESE FOLKS ARE MODERATE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE.
>> THEY HAVE LOCAL EXPERIENCE
HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
SO AND THEN THIS YOU CAN JUST
CLICK DOWN OK?
YEAH WELL HELP OK.
THIS IS A SECOND OFFER THIS HAS
AN INCREASE IN PURCHASE PRICE
OF FIFTEEN MILLION HIGHER
ERNEST MONIZ OF ONE POINT
TWENTY FIVE MILLION THEY THEY
CATEGORIZE THEIR TIME FRAMES A
LITTLE DIFFERENTLY HERE THEY
MERGED DUE DILIGENCE AND
GOVERNMENT APPROVAL TIMELINES
AND AND THEY FOUND IT DIFFICULT
TO SPECIFY WHAT THAT GOVERNMENT
APPROVAL PROCESS IS.
SO ALL IN ALL THEN YOU HAD A
CLOSING PERIOD OF THIRTY DAYS
WHICH IS ACTUALLY QUITE
REASONABLE SO WE COULDN'T
DEFINE THE ACTUAL TIME PERIOD
BECAUSE OF THEIR UNWILLINGNESS
TO UNDERSTAND HOW HOW LONG THE
CITY WOULD TAKE FOR THE
APPROVALS.
SO THEY ARE PROPOSING TWO
HUNDRED EIGHTY TO THREE HUNDRED
FORTY UNITS.
DENHA DID NOT SPECIFY RETAIL
AND THEN THEY'RE THINKING
OF ONE ONE STOLLE PER UNIT AND
THEN TEN TO TWENTY SPACES FOR
PUBLIC USE.
NO CONTINGENCIES ATTACHED TO
THIS AND WHEN I SAY
CONTINGENCIES IT'S TYPICALLY
SOMETHING LIKE THE TAX
ABATEMENTS OR I MEAN I'M NOT
AND YOU ALL KNOW THIS BUT
FINANCING CONTINGENCIES CERTAIN
REPORTS BUT SO THIS IS CLEAN.
NO CONTINGENCIES.
SUSTAINABILITY IS THERE WILLING
TO GO OVER AND ABOVE AND THEN
LOCAL EXPERIENCE.
THEY DO NOT HAVE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE.
THEY ARE EXPERIENCED AND JUST
KNOW THESE ARE ALL VERY
QUALIFIED THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT AND WE TRY AND OR HANK OR
JACK KNOW ALL ALL OF THESE
PEOPLE SO THIRD OFFER ANOTHER
ONE AT FIFTEEN MILLION DOLLARS
ERNEST MONIZ THREE HUNDRED
SEVENTY FIVE THOUSAND
DEAD PERIOD OF ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THREE AND THIRTY DAYS
FOR GOVERNMENT APPROVAL AND
THIRTY DAY CLOSING.
SO ALL IN ALL THEY WERE
SUGGESTING A FOUR HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY DAY CLOSE WHICH ACTUALLY
IS PROBABLY THE SHORTEST OF ALL
OF THESE AND THEN THREE HUNDRED
FIFTY UNITS SEVEN THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED SQUARE FEET OF RETAIL
STRUCTURED PARKING NO
CONTINGENCIES MODERATE
SUSTAINABILITY THEY DIDN'T
REALLY ADDRESS IT MUCH AND THEY
DO HAVE EXPERIENCE.
A DEVELOPMENT PERSON THAT WE
WORK WITH HAS HAD EXPERIENCE IN
ANN ARBOR FOURTH OFFER THIS WAS
INTERESTING THE WAY THEY DID IT
THEY ARE PROPOSING BASED ON A
PER DOOR PRICE SO AT THIRTY ONE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED A DOOR IF
THE IF ALL FIVE FIFTY FOUR ARE
ENTITLED BY THE CITY THAT THEY
ARE WILLING TO PAY THE
SEVENTEEN MILLION FOUR HUNDRED
AND FIFTY ONE AND THEIR MINIMUM
BASED ON WHATEVER YOUR
ENTITLEMENT IS IS FOURTEEN
MILLION ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY
FIVE THOUSAND THEY HAVE HAD
VERY RECENT TRANSACTION IN THE
CITY SO THEY FELT COMFORTABLE
WITH MAXIMUM APPROVAL PERIOD
OF FOUR HUNDRED EIGHTY SIX DAYS
CLOSING PERIOD OF ONE HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY SO IT'S A SEVEN
HUNDRED EIGHTY SIX DAY WINDOW
ALTOGETHER BUT THEY'RE WILLING
TO PUT FIVE HUNDRED FIFTY FOUR
UNITS TEN THOUSAND RETAIL,
PLENTY OF PARKING WILLING TO
WORK WITH THE CITY.
THIS WOULD BE A TWO PHASED
APPROACH.
THEY'D BUILD A TOWER ON THE
SOUTH OF TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY
SEVEN UNITS AND THEN ABSORB
THAT AND THEN HAVE A PARKING
WHILE THEY'RE DOING THAT AND
THEN BUILD A TOWER IN THE NORTH
.
NO CONTINGENCIES.
HI PROPOSAL OF SUSTAINABILITY
AND THEY HAVE RECENT LOCAL
EXPERIENCE SO THOSE ARE THE
FOUR OFFERS ON CLINES LOT AND
THEN WE JUST PUT TOGETHER A
SUMMARY IT'S BASICALLY
RESTATING IT BUT WE JUST WANTED
YOU TO SEE IT SUPPLY SIDE.
OK, HANK'S GOING TO GO OVER
FOUR ONE FIVE WEST WASHINGTON
SAME LINES, DIFFERENT PROPERTY
SO MAYBE KEEP IT THERE.
>> OK, SO FOR FIFTEEN WEST
WASHINGTON AGAIN HERE THIS IS A
MARKETING REPORT FROM CBRE THAT
SHOWS THE SAME BROADCAST
ACTIVITY A LITTLE OVER THIRTY
THREE THOUSAND GROUPS THIS WAS
SENT TO ULTIMATELY HAD FIFTY
SIX USERS THAT ENTERED THE DEAL
ROOM FIFTY TWO THAT ACTUALLY
DOWNLOADED DOCUMENTS OUT OF THE
DEAL ROOM WHICH AGAIN IS KIND
OF THE KEY METRIC THAT WE LOOK
AT TO DETERMINE HOW ENGAGED
THOSE GROUPS WERE.
SO YOU KNOW, THERE WERE SIXTY
SIX CLIENT FIFTY TWO ON FOUR
FIFTEEN VERY STRONG FOR FOR
DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES
ESPECIALLY CONSIDERING THE
CHALLENGING CLIMATE WE'RE IN
FOR FIFTEEN WEST WASHINGTON HAS
AN EXISTING PD SO JUST WANTED
TO REITERATE OUT THAT THERE IS
ACTUALLY A PRE-APPROVED PLAN
FOR THIS SITE.
SO IN THIS INSTANCE THE
APPROACH IS A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT FOR KLEIN.
YOU KNOW WE WERE REALLY LETTING
THE MARKET TELL US WHAT THEY
WERE ABLE TO BUILD HERE.
WE KIND OF TOLD THE MARKET WHAT
YOU'RE ALLOWED TO BUILD BASED
ON THE EXISTING PD.
SOME OF THE GOALS OF THE PD
WERE TO REMEDIATE THE
CONTAMINATED BROWNFIELD SITE TO
BUILD A SEGMENT OF THE TREE
LINE TRAIL, PROVIDE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND THE REQUIREMENT
THERE IS AT LEAST 15 PERCENT
OF THE RESIDENTIAL UNITS WOULD
BE AFFORDABLE PRESERVE THE
CHIMNEY FOR CHIMNEY SWIFT
HABITAT, CONTRIBUTE TO THE
CHARACTER OF THE OLD WEST SIDE
HISTORIC DISTRICT, IMPROVE THE
FLOODPLAIN FROM THE EXISTING
CONDITION.
THE DETAILS OF THE PROJECT
WOULD BE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
SEVEN UNITS OF RESIDENTIAL
APARTMENT HOUSING AND YEAH
INCLUDES OFF STREET PARKING
OPEN SPACE WITH THE SEGMENT THE
TREE LINED TRAIL THE PROPERTY
WOULD BE ON STILTS WITH FIRST
FLOOR OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS
ELEVATED AT A MINIMUM OF ONE
FOOT ABOVE THE POINT TWO
PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD
ELEVATION AND THEN THERE WOULD
BE PARKING PROPOSED BELOW THE
BUILDING.
SO HERE WE HAVE THREE OFFERS
AGAIN ANONYMOUS THIS IS OFFER A
THE PRICE ON THIS OFFER IS ONE
MILLION EARNEST MONEY DEPOSIT
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND DUE DILIGENCE PERIOD
LENGTH THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
FIVE DAYS GOVERNMENT APPROVALS
FIVE HUNDRED AND FORTY DAYS
WITH THE CLOSING PERIOD
OF NINETY DAYS ALL IN ALL
THAT'S NINE HUNDRED AND NINETY
FIVE POTENTIAL DAYS TO CLOSE
THE TRANSACTION.
THE CONTINGENCY ON THIS OFFER
WOULD BE LOGITECH FINANCING
THAT'S LOW INCOME HOUSING TAX
CREDITS.
THIS ESSENTIALLY WOULD BE A ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING PROJECT AND THAT MEANS
THAT THE UNITS WILL BE 30 TO 30
TO 80 PERCENT.
AM I?
THIS GROUP SPOKE WITH MR. ABOUT
THE OPPORTUNITY TO RECEIVE
BIOTECH FINANCING FOR THIS
PROPERTY AND CONFIRMED THAT IT
WAS POSSIBLE.
I THINK THAT THERE WAS CONCERNS
ABOUT THAT BECAUSE IT'S IN THE
FLOODPLAIN.
IT'S RIGHT NEXT TO A RAILROAD.
MR. MAY HAVE ISSUES WITH THAT
IN DIFFERENT INSTANCES BUT THEY
CONFIRMED THAT MR. WAS
COMFORTABLE IN THIS SITUATION.
SUSTAINABILITY IS MODERATE.
THE SAME GAUGE THAT WE WERE
USING AND LOT THE BASELINE
THERE IS AN ALL ELECTRIC
BUILDING AND THEY DO HAVE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE.
>> THIS GROUP OFFER BE AN
INCREASE IN PRICE TO ONE POINT
SEVEN MILLION EARNEST MONEY
DEPOSIT OF SIXTY THOUSAND DUE
DILIGENCE PERIOD OF ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY DAYS GOVERNMENT
APPROVALS PERIOD OF FOUR
HUNDRED AND TWENTY DAYS A
CLOSING PERIOD SIXTY DAYS FOR A
TOTAL OF SIX HUNDRED AND THIRTY
DAYS THERE ARE NO CONTINGENCIES
WITH THIS OFFER THE AS I
MENTIONED THE MINIMUM
REQUIREMENT FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING WAS FIFTEEN PERCENT
THEY ARE PROPOSING TWENTY
PERCENT OF THE UNITS ARE GOING
TO BE AT SIXTY PERCENT.
AM I WITH THE REST OF THE UNITS
BEING OFFERED MARKET RATE AGAIN
SUSTAINABILITY MODERATE AND
THIS ALSO DOES HAVE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE.
THIS IS THE LAST OFFER FOR FOUR
FIFTEEN THE PRICE HERE IS TWO
MILLION EARNEST MONEY OF ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DUE DILIGENCE.
THIS IS ONE WHERE AGAIN THEY
DIDN'T HAVE A SET TIMEFRAME
OF DUE DILIGENCE.
IT'S THE LEADER OF ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY DAYS OR THE TIME
NECESSARY TO COMPLETE
FLOATPLANE BROWNFIELD DUE
DILIGENCE SO THEY DON'T HAVE A
GOVERNMENT APPROVAL PERIOD
LENGTH AND THEN A CLOSING
OF THIRTY DAYS AGAIN NO DEFINED
MAXIMUM THIS OFFER HAD
CONTINGENCIES THAT WERE A
LITTLE UNIQUE BECAUSE THE PD
DOES ASK THAT THE DEVELOPER
TAKE CARE OF THESE THINGS BUT
IN THIS INSTANCE THEY'RE ASKING
THE CITY TO DELIVER
ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION,
FLOODPLAIN MITIGATION AND TREE
LINED RAIL AND PUBLIC REALM
ENHANCEMENTS.
THIS IS A TWO PHASE MIXED
INCOME HOUSING PROJECT AND
THEY'RE OFFERING NET ZERO
EMISSIONS READY DESIGN.
SO THAT'S WHY WE HAVE
SUSTAINABILITY AS HIGH AND THIS
GROUP DOES NOT HAVE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE.
AND AGAIN, WE HAVE A SUMMARY
HERE OF THOSE THREE OFFERS AND
THAT IS THE END OF OUR
PRESENTATION QUESTIONS.
UNLESS I MISSED SOMETHING I
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
UNLESS I MISSED SOMETHING.
THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN WHAT
YOU'VE SHOWN US FOR 415
WASHINGTON AND WHAT YOU SHOULD
US FOR IS THIS MAYBE WE ALREADY
ENTITLED IN THE PUDI AND I'M
JUST FORGETTING IT DOESN'T SAY
THE NUMBER OF UNITS THAT ARE
GOING TO BE PROVIDED IN EACH
OF THE PROJECTS.
IS THAT BECAUSE WAS ALREADY SET
IN THE PUDI IN WASHINGTON.
>> YES.
SO FOR 415 WEST WASHINGTON THEY
DO IT WAS APPROVED FOR ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVEN UNITS.
OK SO THANK YOU AND FOR KLINE
THERE WAS NO APPROVED OF OK
JUST A QUESTION ON THAT
TWO-FACED MIXED INCOME HOUSING
AND OFFERS C IS THE MIX THERE.
SIXTY PERCENT OF THEM I MEAN
I'M ASSUMING THEY DIDN'T
SPECIFY BUT CAN YOU GIVE ANY
INSIGHT AS TO THE MIXED INCOME
THERE?
>> I DON'T HAVE MORE DETAIL ON
WHAT THEY'RE EXACTLY PLANNING.
>> OK, I GUESS I WONDER IF WE
WILL PRIOR TO NEEDING TO KIND
OF EVALUATE THESE MAKE GET ANY
ADDITIONAL DETAILS AND IF IN
THE PREVIOUS EXAMPLE THERE WERE
TWO THAT WERE HIGH ON
SUSTAINABILITY, FOR EXAMPLE,
WILL WE GET ANY ADDITIONAL
DETAIL AROUND WHAT THOSE
DIFFERENCES ARE THAT MADE THEM
HIGH?
ARE THEY OFFERING THE EXACT
SAME THINGS IN TERMS OF THEIR
SUSTAINABILITY FEATURES?
ARE THEY DIFFERENT THINGS?
BUT THEY BOTH MOVED THEM UP
INTO THE NEXT CATEGORY, FOR
EXAMPLE.
AND THEN I GUESS THIS IS
PROBABLY ALSO A QUESTION
RELATED T THE PREVIOUS ONE.
THERE WERE SOME PRETTY WIDE
RANGES IN THE NUMBER OF UNITS.
DOES THAT ALSO RESULT IN A
PRETTY WIDE RANGE IN KIND
OF THE SCALE OF THE DESIGN THAT
THEY ARE PROPOSING?
>> SO REGARDING ENVIRONMENT THE
SUSTAINABILITY PIECE, WE WILL
GET MORE CLARIFICATION ON THAT
AS THE ANALYSIS GETS MORE FINE
TUNED REGARDING UNIT NUMBERS.
WHAT WHAT YOUR QUESTION ABOUT
THAT ABOUT THE SO WE GET MORE
OF A DESIGN TO KNOW UNDERSTAND
THE DESIGN.
SO I GUESS THINKING BETWEEN TWO
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY TWO UNITS
AND FIVE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOUR
UNITS ARE WE TALKING ABOUT
MASSIVE DIFFERENCES IN THE TYPE
OF UNITS THAT ARE BEING OFFERED
LIKE SIGNIFICANTLY SMALLER
UNITS OR ARE WE TALKING ABOUT
VASTLY DIFFERENT SIZES OF THE
STRUCTURES WOULD BE BUILT
THEMSELVES?
YEAH YEAH NO IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION.
I MEAN WE CAN AGAIN GET MORE
CLARIFICATION IN THE NEXT STEP
.
CONSERVATIVE.
THANK YOU FOR ASKING THAT
QUESTION BECAUSE I WAS GOING TO
ASK A SIMILAR QUESTION.
I MEAN I WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
SOME DETAILS ABOUT THE NUMBER
OF BEDS AND BATHS ANTICIPATED
IN THE UNITS.
THERE'S ALSO A PRETTY WIDE
VARIATION IN THE PARKING OF THE
FIRST FOUR OFFERS SIX HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY STRUCTURED PARKING
SPACES IS VERY HIGH AND
RELATIVE TO THE FIRST ONE WHICH
WAS WELL IT'S A LOT FEWER
UNITS.
YEAH OK.
I WAS GOING TO SAY USUALLY
YOU'LL SEE THAT SOMEWHAT IN
LINE WITH THE AMOUNT OF UNITS
THEY PLAN TO BUILD.
YEAH BUT THERE'S OBVIOUSLY SOME
VARIATION STILL BUT THAT'S EVEN
MORE THAT'S MORE THAN ONE SPACE
PER UNIT WHICH IS A TREND AWAY
FROM WHAT WE ARE SEEING
ESPECIALLY IN FOR DEVELOPMENT
IN WALKABLE LOCATIONS.
WE ARE SEEING POINT SIX SIX AS
A TREND.
SO THIS IS MORE THAN ONE PER
UNIT.
THE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY
PLUS UNIT IS OFFERING ONE
PARKING SPACE PER UNIT AND THEN
THE LOWEST NUMBER OF UNITS HAS
LIKE A POINT FIVE OR RATHER NOT
BUT IT DOESN'T HAVE EVEN ONE
SPACE PER UNIT THERE.
SO THOSE ARE REALLY INTERESTING
VARIATIONS.
SO I'D LIKE TO HEAR THE
THINKING AND YOU MENTIONED THAT
OFFER A IS TWO HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY TWO HIGH QUALITY
MULTIFAMILY RENTAL.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR THE
VARIATION IN SQUARE FOOTAGE
OF THE UNITS AND AGAIN I'M
INTERESTED IN BATHROOMS TO
BEDROOMS EVERY ONE OF THOSE
AUTHOR OFFERS AND THANK YOU SIR
.
WELL THE YES I GUESS I'M IT
SORT OF HELP US SET OUR
EXPECTATIONS AROUND WHAT TYPE
OF DETAIL CAN BE PROVIDED AND
IN TERMS OF THE YOU KNOW WHAT
WHAT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION IS
CAN BE ACQUIRED AT THIS POINT
AROUND EACH OF THESE DIFFERENT
OFFERS TO BE HELPFUL TO
UNDERSTAND A LITTLE BIT.
YOU KNOW, I'M CURIOUS YOU
MENTIONED THAT THERE'S NOT MUCH
THERE ISN'T DESCRIPTION AROUND
WHAT TYPE OF RETAIL, FOR
EXAMPLE, WOULD BE IN INTEGRATED
IN THIS.
BUT YOU KNOW, SOME OF MY
COLLEAGUES HAVE ASKED AROUND,
YOU KNOW, WHAT ARE THE
DIFFERENCE IN TERMS OF HOUSING
?
SOME OF THEM HAVE LOCAL
EXPERIENCE AND SOME OF THEM
DON'T.
I UNDERSTAND THE DESIRE TO KEEP
THE MAINTAIN THE PRIVACY THE
DIFFERENT FOLKS WHO ARE
SUBMITTING OFFERS RIGHT NOW.
BUT I THINK I WOULD CERTAINLY
BE INTERESTED TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT TYPES OF PROJECTS DO THEY
HAVE?
ARE THEY ENVISIONING OR IS THIS
YOU KNOW, IS THERE SOMETHING
THAT YOU KNOW, OTHER PROJECTS
LOCALLY THAT WE MIGHT LOOK TO
OR IN OTHER COMMUNITIES THAT
THEY'RE IMAGINING, YOU KNOW,
EVEN KIND OF MODELING?
SO WHAT KIND OF WHAT ADDITIONAL
DETAILS WHY MIGHT WE GET ABOUT
THESE DIFFERENT OFFERS ON BOTH
PARCELS?
SO WE HAVE A LOT OF THAT DETAIL
AND WE DIDN'T WANT TO OVERLOAD
YOU ALL TONIGHT WITH THEY ALL
THESE DEVELOPERS SUBMITTED
PRETTY EXTENSIVE QUALIFICATIONS
AND EXPERIENCES AND CURRENT
PROJECTS, PAST PROJECTS.
YOU KNOW, REGARDING THE UNIT
NUMBERS, THAT'S WHAT I THINK
THAT'S SORT OF THEIR TARGET.
THEY DON'T KNOW UNTIL THEY KNOW
BUT THIS IS SOME TARGET.
BUT WE'RE DEFINITELY GOING TO
GET SOME MORE INFORMATION
AROUND THAT.
IT'S A GOOD IDEA TO GET THE BED
TO BATH COUNTS ALL OF THAT.
>> SO THAT'S ALL COMING.
I MEAN JUST AS A FOLLOW UP ON
THAT, I MEAN I THINK THESE ARE
THESE ARE BOTH PARCELS AND YOU
KNOW, SOMEONE BELOVED AND
LOCATIONS IN OUR COMMUNITY AS
WELL.
AND SO FOLKS WILL BE, YOU KNOW,
INTERESTED IN SORT OF MORE THAN
THE BARE BONES AROUND WHAT THAT
LOOKS LIKE.
AND SO I THINK WE'RE TRYING TO
YOU KNOW, IT'S GREAT TO BE ABLE
TO IT'S GREAT TO SEE SO MUCH
INTEREST AND TO BE ABLE TO SEE
THE DIFFERENCE IN IN THESE.
BUT I THINK THE MORE
INFORMATION THAT WE CAN GET TO
BE ABLE TO ALLOW US TO MAKE A
STRONG DECISION WILL BE HELPFUL
.
ABSOLUTELY NO THANK YOU.
>> I THOUGHT I'M ONE OF THESE
OFFERS FOR THE CLIENT LOT
OF HAD NO RETAIL BUT NOW AS I
LOOK THE COMPARISON CHART THEY
ALL HAVE A RETAIL IMAGINE A
RETAIL COMPONENT ON THE GROUND
FLOOR ONE DO NOT SPEAK TO IT.
SO IN THIS SQUARE FOOTAGE ALL
OF THEM OK I THINK IN THE BACK
COULD HAVE JUST BEEN AN UPDATE.
OH I THINK THE DECK ERROR SORT
OF THING I FORGET WHAT ACTUALLY
TRACK ISIS AND I THINK THESE
INDICATED IN THIS AS ANY BUT
IT'S SO THEY WOULD HAVE THEY
UPDATED US AFTER I THINK WE GOT
MORE DETAIL FROM THEM AND THEY
GAVE US THE SIX THOUSAND SO
THEY ALL IMAGINE HAVING SO YOU
KNOW, SPEAKING TO COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG'S POINT IT WOULD
BE NICE AND I GUESS I DON'T
KNOW WHAT PEOPLE NORMALLY WOULD
PROVIDE AT THIS LEVEL PROPOSAL
BUT IT WOULD BE INTERESTING HOW
DO THEY CONCEIVE OF IT BEING AS
LIKE FOOD HALL OR YOU KNOW,
WHATEVER IT MIGHT BE?
I THINK THAT THAT WOULD BE THAT
WOULD BE HELPFUL FOR MY
UNDERSTANDING FOR THIS BECAUSE
IT IS IN SUCH AN IMPORTANT
LOCATION.
I THINK WE CARE A LOT ABOUT HOW
IT ADDS TO OUR DOWNTOWN.
>> UNDERSTOOD.
AND THAT IS PART OF THE NEXT
STEP.
COUNCILOR, THANK YOU.
>> ON THE CLEAN LINE WITH THE
FOUR OFFERS HERE OFFER A HAS
OTHER CONTINGENCIES A
BROWNFIELD PROPERTY TAX
ABATEMENT BUT I NOTICED THE
OTHER THREE DON'T HAVE THIS AND
FOR ALL INTENTS AND PURPOSES A
IS NOT WILDLY DIFFERENT FROM BC
AND HOW ARE YOU ABLE TO OFFER
ANY INSIGHT AS TO WHY OFFER A
WOULD REQUIRE THE BROWNFIELD IN
THAT SITUATION WHILE THE OTHER
THREE DON'T?
I THINK THE BROWNFIELD IS A
THEY IF THEY PENETRATE TO GO
DOWN UNDER GROUND STRUCTURE
VERSUS MOST OF THESE ARE PODIUM
STYLE PARKING AND SO THEY WOULD
NOT I'D HAVE TO GET
CONFIRMATION FROM MY FRIEND
HERE THAT I THINK THAT THEIR
INTENT IS TO GO SUBTERRANEAN
WITH THEIR PARKING.
I THINK IT THEN WOULD HAVE TO
QUALIFY FOR A BROWNFIELD THERE
THAT'S ACCURATE IF THEY WERE TO
RUN INTO AN ENVIRONMENTAL
SITUATION AND THE UNDERGROUND
PARKING CAN GET EXPENSIVE AND
THEY WOULD BE ASKING FOR THAT
COMPONENT TO BE PROVIDED SOME
SORT OF A TENTATIVE TAX
INCREMENTAL FINANCING.
YEAH, GOT RID OF THAT IF YOU GO
UNDERGROUND I THINK YEAH.
BECAUSE THAT COULD HAVE LONG
TERM IMPLICATIONS IN TERMS
OF TAX REVENUE.
AND THEN JUST FOR CLARIFICATION
FOR 415 WASHINGTON ALL OFFERS
WOULD HAVE SIMILAR BROWNFIELDS
REQUIREMENTS DIFFERENCE IN THE
DETAILS BUT STILL WOULD REQUIRE
IT.
>> YES, NOT CONTINGENT NOT ALL
ARE CONTINGENT BUT THEY ARE ALL
PROBABLY GOING TO BE SIX SUMMER
ON THE PUBLIC PARKING SPACES AT
IS IT I GUESS CONCEDE THAT
THESE ARE SPACES THE CITY, A
CITY OR DENHA I GUESS IN
COMBINATION WOULD GET REVENUE
OUT OF AND THEN YOU KNOW
BECAUSE I GUESS I'M JUST
THINKING ON THAT TEN OR TWENTY
SPACES QUESTION I MEAN YEAH I
DON'T THAT COULD BE ALMOST
CONCEIVABLY LIKE GUEST PARKING
RIGHT IN LARGE UNIT.
SO I'M JUST WONDERING WHAT WAS
THE WHAT WAS THE DEFINITION
OF THAT PUBLIC PARKING I CAN
SPEAK TO?
I MEAN I THINK THE IDEA BEHIND
IT WAS YOU KNOW THIS IS
CURRENTLY A PARKING LOT SO TO
OFFER SOME BACK AND THEN
OBVIOUSLY GROUPS MIGHT HAVE
DIFFERING OPINIONS ON HOW MUCH
THAT THEY WANT TO OFFER.
SO I THINK THAT IN THAT
INSTANCE THEY'RE THEY'RE TRYING
TO MAKE IT KNOWN THAT THEY'RE
WILLING TO OFFER SOME.
BUT I UNDERSTAND YOU MAY NOT BE
SIGNIFICANT, OK, BUT YEAH,
RIGHT INTO THE IDEA MAYBE WOULD
BE TO KEEP THE SAME LIKE
REVENUE STRUCTURE AS THEY
CURRENTLY
.
OK, THAT'S GREAT ADDITIONAL
QUESTIONS KEYING OFF OF A
LITTLE BIT I FORGET WHICH
COUNCIL MEMBER HIT THIS AS TO
BE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE ON A
FOUR ON THE QUEENSLAND BETWEEN
FOR EXAMPLE THE ON THE POLES
AND UNITS VERSUS ONE IS TWO
SEVENTY TWO ONE FIVE FIFTY FIVE
FIFTY FOUR.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY AND WHETHER
THAT'S MORE UNITS AS A RESULT
OF BEING SMALLER OR LARGER WHAT
HAVE YOU DO WE HAVE ANY
INDICATION AS TO DESIGN
ELEMENTS OR WHAT THE LOOK FEEL
FROM FROM PEDESTRIANS WILL BE
LIKING THIS AT THIS JUNCTURE IT
SEEMS EARLY BUT I'M ASKING YEAH
IT'S JUST NOT QUITE YET I'M
SURE IT'S NOT A VERY GOOD
ANSWER.
I THINK IT IS.
I THINK FOR FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH
I MEAN THE ONLY THING WE WOULD
OFFER IS THAT WE ALWAYS MADE IT
VERY CLEAR THAT THE EXPECTATION
IS A VERY HIGH QUALITY DESIGN
AND YOU KNOW, ESPECIALLY
THERE'S SOME THAT ARE COMING
OFF OF SOME LOCAL EXPERIENCE
AND YOU KNOW, THEY'VE TESTED
THE MARKET AND THEY KNOW WHAT'S
NEEDED RIGHT NOW.
SO IT'S IN THEIR BEST INTEREST
.
THEY DON'T WANT TO BUILD WHAT'S
NOT GOING TO GET FILLED SO
THEY'VE THEY HAVE A PRETTY GOOD
PULSE ON THE MARKET FINGER ON
THE PULSE OF WHAT CAN BE
ABSORBED.
SO I THINK YOU MAYBE SOME HAVE
DONE DO HAVE MORE EXPERIENCE IN
THE MARKET AND THEY KNOW THAT
THIS MANY UNITS CAN BE FILLED.
BUT WE WERE WE'LL GET MORE
DETAILS FOR YOU BECAUSE THAT IS
THE NEXT STEP.
BUT I HOPE THAT MAKES SENSE
.
ONE LAST QUESTION FOR ME ON FOR
FIFTEEN WASHINGTON COULD YOU
RECAP AND CLARIFY THE
AFFORDABLE OPTIONS BETWEEN THE
THREE?
>> YEAH, SO UM OFFER A WOULD BE
FULLY AFFORDABLE PROJECT AT 30
PERCENT 80 PERCENT AM I OFFER B
WOULD OFFER 20 PERCENT OF THE
UNITS AT 60 PERCENT AND AND
THEN OFFER C IS JUST FOLLOWING
THE PD AS IT'S WRITTEN WHICH
WOULD BE FIFTEEN PERCENT OF THE
FLOOR OF THE UNITS OFFERED AT
AFFORDABLE AND PERFECT.
THANK YOU.
WELL THANKS FOR CALLING
ATTENTION BACK TO THIS.
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE YOU
GOT A LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL
ABOUT NET ZERO READY DESIGN
THAT IF THAT IS A PHRASE THAT
THEY ARE TAKING FROM OUR
ORDINANCE THEY SHOULD BE
TALKING TO OUR PLANNING STAFF
IN TERMS OF HOW THAT IS
INTERPRETED.
I MEAN SO YEAH.
AND WE WOULD WANT TO HEAR MORE
ABOUT THAT.
UNDERSTOOD THAT NOT WELL WITH
THE AS TO WHAT JUST TO CONFIRM
THE SPECIFICALLY AND THEN THERE
ARE A COUPLE OF THEM THAT SAID
SPECIFICALLY THAT THEY WILL BE
COMPLIANT WITH THE CITY'S ASK.
SO THEY'RE AWARE OF IT
ESPECIALLY THOSE THAT HAVE LOOK
RECENT EXPERIENCE.
YEAH.
I MEAN IT'S JUST ALL ELECTRIC
NET ZERO ARE DIFFERENT AND NET
ZERO READY IS KIND OF NOT THING
EXACTLY.
>> SO I'D LIKE TO KNOW EXACTLY
WHAT THEY MEAN BY THAT.
THAT'S A LITTLE BIT OF A VAGUE
CATEGORY.
YEAH YEAH.
WE CAN CONFIRM.
>> THANKS COUNCILOR.
I'M HEARING A LOT OF WE'LL GET
MORE DETAILS IN THE NEXT STEP
SO THAT'S MAYBE FOR THAT
PURPOSE.
BUT I'M JUST WONDERING IF YOU
CAN ADDRESS AND THIS IS FOR THE
CLAIM PROPERTY AT SCALE AT ALL.
I MEAN THERE'S OBVIOUSLY
THERE'S A BIG DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN YOU KNOW, THE FIRST IN
THE LAST AND I'M JUST WONDERING
IF THERE'S ANY SENSE OF HEIGHT
OR YOU KNOW, ARE WE ARE WE
TALKING YOU KNOW, OFFER A IT'S
ROUGHLY THE SAME SIZE BUT THE
UNITS ARE JUST A LOT BIGGER.
>> ANYTHING YOU CAN GIVE US AS
A PINCH RIGHT NOW?
>> YEAH, I MEAN I CAN SAY THAT,
YOU KNOW, THE UNDER THE ONE
ZONING YOU'RE ALLOWED TO GO ONE
HUNDRED EIGHTY FEET BY RIGHT.
THERE IS AN ABILITY TO
POTENTIALLY GO UP TO TWO
HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIVE FEET.
I DON'T HAVE SPECIFICS SORRY IF
ANYBODY PLANS TO GO ABOVE THE
ONE HUNDRED OR 80 FEET THAT'S
ALLOWED OR IF THEY'RE PLANNING
TO DO LESS I THINK ABOUT ONE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY FEET IT'D BE
ROUGHLY 15 STOREYS I DON'T
RECALL IF WE GOT ANYBODY SAYING
THEY WOULD GO OVER THAT 180 OR
IF THEY GAVE A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF FLOORS AT THIS POINT.
YEAH YEAH.
>> SORRY NO THAT'S OK.
I I'M LESS CONCERNED ABOUT THAT
AND I'M NOT CONCERNED ABOUT
ANYTHING I'M LESS INTERESTED IN
THAT.
I I YOU KNOW IT'S DOWNTOWN
SHOULD BE IT CAN AND SHOULD BE
TALL BUT JUST LIKE THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO IS
ONE QUITE A LOT BIGGER OVERALL
IS THE PROJECT THAN THAN THE
OTHER.
>> YEAH I MEAN FOR SURE WITH
FIVE HUNDRED AND FIFTY UNITS
YOU'RE GOING TO BE PHYSICALLY
LARGER THAN A TWO HUNDRED AND
SEVENTY TWO UNIT TO ANSWER THAT
QUESTION OF LIKE THE SIZE
OF THE UNIT AT.
YEAH I THINK THAT YOU KNOW IN
THIS INSTANCE ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE THESE ARE MARKET UNITS
YOU KNOW YOU NEED TO CATER TO
WHAT THE MARKET WANTS.
SO A MARKET STUDY WOULD
PROBABLY DRIVE THAT WHAT DRIVES
THAT UNIT OR THAT UNIT SIZE
IT'S PROBABLY GOING TO BE VERY
IN LINE WHETHER IT BE FIVE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FOUR TO
SEVENTY TWO VERY IN LINE WITH A
TYPICAL MARKET RATE COMMUNITY
THAT WOULD ALREADY SEE IN THIS
YOU KNOW, IN THIS TYPE
OF ENVIRONMENT.
SO I GUESS TO ANSWER THAT I
DON'T SUSPECT THERE WOULD BE A
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE SIZE OF THE UNITS AMONG
THESE PROJECTS BUT WE WILL
OF COURSE CONFIRM THAT
INFORMATION.
OK, THAT'S MY BASED ON THAT
POINT I THINK I'M GETTING MORE
INFORMATION ON THESE.
I THINK IF THEY HAVE A SENSE
OF WHAT MARKET THEY'RE
TARGETING, THAT WOULD BE
SOMETHING THAT WE'D BE
INTERESTED IN UNDERSTANDING AS
WELL WITH 415 AS I RECALL WE
ADDED SOME INFORMATION AROUND
SUSTAINABILITY INTO THE BODY
BUT THE LANGUAGE WAS SOMEWHAT
OPEN.
IT WAS TRYING TO BE
ASPIRATIONAL ABOUT WHERE WE ARE
GOING AND SO I THINK MORE
DETAIL AROUND WHAT WHAT'S MEANT
BETWEEN THE MODERATE AND AS
COUNCIL MEMBER, YOU KNOW, YOU
KIND OF THAT SOMETHING AS HIGH
BUT NETZER ALREADY YOU KNOW
WHAT'S WHAT ARE THEY
ANTICIPATING AND THAT WOULD
WOULD BE USEFUL AND ON THE LAST
OFFER OBVIOUSLY THERE IS A
REQUIREMENT THERE FOR THE CITY
TO BE PROVIDING AND I DON'T
KNOW IF WE HAVE ANY INFORMATION
YET AROUND YOU KNOW WHAT THOSE
COSTS MIGHT LOOK LIKE FOR US IN
TERMS OF BEING ABLE TO COMPARE
THESE OFFERS.
I DON'T THINK THAT WE WERE
ANTICIPATING THAT THAT WOULD BE
THAT WE WOULD HAVE TO BE DOING
THAT WORK.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE HAVE ANY
INFORMATION ON THAT IT WOULD BE
USEFUL.
>> YEAH, WE ARE DEFINITELY
DELVING TO THAT ONE.
ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
WHAT IS WHAT IS THE BEST
PROCESS FOR US TO RECEIVE
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS AND
GRANULARITY ON WHAT WE'VE
TALKED ABOUT TODAY?
>> HOW IS THAT GOING TO IF YOU
JUST KEEP FOR US.
SURE.
OH, JUST RUN TO THE
ADMINISTRATOR UM THROUGH A
MOUNTAIN OR I CAN GO YOU CAN GO
DIRECTLY TO MYSELF.
>> NO, NO.
WE NEED TO COMMUNICATE TO ME NO
DOUBT THE COMMUNICATION TO CBRE
E NEEDS TO COME THROUGH THE
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE SO IF YOU
HAVE A QUESTION SEND IT IN JUST
FOR CONTEXT PURPOSES OF THE
KLEINE BIDDERS WERE AWARE THAT
THERE HAS BEEN THIS PUBLIC
REQUEST FOR SOME PUBLIC PARKING
AND SO WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE
?
ARE WE ASKING THEM TO PROVIDE
IT?
IS THE CITY GOING TO
PARTICIPATE?
THAT'S A QUESTION THAT HAS TO
GET RESOLVED.
SO THAT'S WHERE SOME OF THAT
HEDGING IS COMING FROM.
THE OTHER THING IS THIS IS NOT
A USUAL PROCESS FOR REAL
ESTATE.
THEY KNEW THEY WERE GOING TO BE
DISCUSSED OPENLY AND WE ASKED
THEM TO GIVE YOUR BEST AND
FOLLOW ON MONEY SO THAT'S WHERE
IT'S AT AND GETTING INTO DESIGN
AND OTHER THINGS LIKE THAT AS
YOU'VE HEARD US SAY BEFORE, ALL
OF THOSE THINGS REQUIRE A
FINANCIAL INVESTMENT.
AM I SERIOUSLY BEING CONSIDERED
BEFORE I GO TO ALL THE EXPENSE
OF SOME OF THE GRANULARITY THAT
WE MAY WANT?
BUT WE THOUGHT THIS WAS FAIR
AND EQUITABLE ACROSS THE BOARD
FOR TONIGHT AND WE LIMITED IT
TO WHAT YOU SEE.
BUT THERE IS MORE INFORMATION
SO WE'LL WORK ON BEING THE
FINAL TO GET ANSWERS BACK AND
WE'LL DEAL WITH ALL THE
QUESTIONS BEFORE WE EVER
ENTERTAIN BRINGING A RESOLUTION
FORWARD.
BUT SORRY TO BE FORCEFUL IS TO
KEEP IT ALL FAIR.
>> IT NEEDS TO COME TO OFFICE.
DO WE HAVE A FINAL QUESTION
PERHAPS FOR ME NOT OUT TO DO
ALL UNDERSTANDING THAT THAT
THEY WERE ASKED FOR LAST AND
LAST BEST AND FINAL ON ON THE
MONEY IN THE LIKE IT'S THEIR
WORLDS IN WHICH YOU KNOW ONE OR
MORE COUNCIL MEMBERS MIGHT SAY,
YOU KNOW, I LIKE I WON'T GO A,
B AND C I LIKE TO LIKE READ IF
THIS WERE TWEAKED OR THEY I
LIKE WHY IF IF SOME OTHER
CONDITION OBTAINED THOSE
CONVERSATIONS THAT THAT THAT
WERE STILL I UNDERSTAND THAT
MIGHT HAVE A MONETARY ELEMENT
TO IT BUT ARE THOSE
CONVERSATIONS ARE THAT CAN CAN
STILL BE HAD AGAIN THROUGH THE
ADMINISTRATOR'S OFFICE?
I'M GOING TO DEFER TO SHURA I
THINK THAT IT WAS SAID THAT AT
THE BEGINNING THE THIS IS
BEFORE FINAL NEGOTIATIONS SO
PERHAPS IT'S IT'S STILL IT'S
STILL ITERATIVE BUT WE'RE
THERE'S NO GUARANTEES THERE'S
CHANGES THAT WOULD BE WILLING
TO BE MADE.
>> OF COURSE.
THANK YOU.
ADDITIONAL QUESTIONS.
>> YEAH.
I'M SORRY THIS HAS ALREADY BEEN
DONE.
IT'S FOR MR TONY.
HOW DO YOU IMAGINE THIS PROCESS
PLAYING OUT IN TERMS OF LIKE
WHAT COMES TO US IN SEPTEMBER?
WHAT ADDITIONAL ARE WE GOING TO
BE EVALUATING THINGS TO THIS
LEVEL OF KIND OF ANONYMITY?
IS THIS THE LEVEL AT WHICH
YOU'RE GOING TO WANT FEEDBACK A
DECISION OR HOW HOW IS THAT
GOING TO PLAY OUT
THE
RESOLUTION AND I WAS REFERRING
TO IS THE ADMINISTRATION WOULD
NEED SOME AUTHORIZATION FROM
YOU TO GO INTO A FINAL MEETING,
A REAL DRIVE IT ALL THE WAY
HOME NEGOTIATION WITH ONE
OF THESE ENTITIES ON BOTH SITES
.
SO THE RESOLUTION WOULD BE
ASKING YOU TO GIVE THAT
AUTHORITY TO DO THAT TO CLOSE
THE DEAL.
SOME OF THE THINGS PROBABLY MAY
NOT BE ANSWERED UNTIL YOU
ACTUALLY TELL SOMEBODY YOU'RE
WHO WE'RE INTERESTED IN NOW
LET'S SIT DOWN.
I CAN'T BE MORE SPECIFIC THAN
THAT, BUT WE NEED YOUR
PERMISSION BEFORE WE CAN GET TO
THAT WITH THEM TO YOU.
YOU ALSO NEED THIS BODY'S
FEEDBACK ON WHICH ONES WERE
MOST INTERESTED IN WHAT
ELEMENTS.
THAT'S WHERE I'M A LITTLE BIT
LOST I GUESS.
I MEAN WE'LL TAKE WHATEVER
FEEDBACK THAT YOU HAVE IS JUST
HAS TO BE APPLIED ACROSS ALL
OF THEM SO YOU KNOW, I WANT TO
BE FAIR TO EVERYBODY.
SOME TOOK MORE RISK THAN
OTHERS.
JUST PUT A PERIOD THERE THE
ONLY ONE THAT SPECIFICALLY
TALKED ABOUT TWO TOWERS YOU
HAVE THAT THERE THEY ALL CHOSE
HOUSING BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN
LISTENING TO THE CONVERSATION.
YOU HEARD CBRE SAY THEY ALL
HAVE EXPERIENCE SO THEY CAN
READILY POINT TO THINGS THEY'VE
ALREADY DONE AND THEY ARE SOME
OF IT WILL BE OBVIOUS BUT THIS
IS WHERE WE ARE COUNCILOR,
THANKS.
I GUESS THIS IS MAYBE A FOLLOW
UP TO COMPLIMENT RACHMAN'S
QUESTION IS I GUESS THEN ARE
YOU ENVISIONING THAT AS THE
NEXT STEP THAT YOU WOULD BE
BRINGING YOUR RECOMMENDATION
BACK TO US OR ARE YOU
ENVISIONING SOME FURTHER
DISCUSSION WITH COUNCIL BEFORE
THEN TO TO GET TO A
RECOMMENDATION THAT HAS KIND
OF CONSENSUS SUPPORT OR AND
GIVEN THE TIME FRAME FOR
SEPTEMBER IS COMING UP PRETTY
QUICKLY, I GUESS MAYBE THIS IS
MAYBE MORE FOR FOR
CONSULTANCIES IS HOW WHEN
SHOULD WE EXPECT THAT WE MIGHT
GET SOME OF THE QUESTIONS BACK
TO THE IRDA, THE ANSWERS BACK
TO THE QUESTIONS THAT WERE
ASKED TONIGHT SINCE THIS MAY
ALL BE HAPPENING RELATIVELY
QUICKLY, WE COULD HAVE ANSWERS
BACK WITHIN A WEEK IF THAT
HELPS.
YEAH, I MEAN, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE
NOT IN A POSITION TO QUITE YET.
I MEAN THEY HAVEN'T
CREATED TOTAL PROJECT COST PRO
FORMA AS BUDGETS SO SO THAT
THAT MIX THAT COMES WITH ALL
OF THIS IS NOT GOING TO BE SET
IN STONE BY ANY MEANS BUT IT'LL
THEY CAN CERTAINLY GIVE US SOME
GUIDANCE TO ANSWER YOUR
QUESTION WITHIN
WE COULD MAKE A
RECOMMENDATION BUT THE WAY THE
PROCESS IS GONE I WANT TO BE
CONSISTENT ON DOING WHAT I SAID
I WOULD DO WITH COUNCIL.
SO WHAT I SAID I WOULD DO IS
BRING YOU THE TOP OFFERS ABSENT
ANYTHING AND WE USE A THIRD
PARTY TO GET IT.
>> SO YOU'VE NOW HEARD THE TOP
OFFERS WE CAN CLOSE A DEAL ON
BOTH SIDES WITH ANY OF THE ONES
THAT YOU COLLECTIVELY DIRECT US
TO GO NEGOTIATE WITH.
>> IF YOU'RE ASKING ME WHAT WE
HAVE A RECOMMENDATION WE COULD
WE COULD BUT WE'RE REALLY NOT
SORT OF HEADED IN THAT
DIRECTION
.
I GUESS I WOULD JUST ASK YOU TO
RECOGNIZE THEY'RE ALL OFFERING
SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
IT'S LIKE WHAT?
SO WHAT DO WE IT'S KIND OF WHAT
WHAT'S BEING PUT TO US?
WHAT DO WE WANT ONE ONE
QUESTION I DID NOT ASK WAS
YOU'VE BROUGHT US THE THE THE
TOP OFFERS IN THIS MARKET
QUALIFIED AND I TRUST THAT
JUDGMENT AROUND THAT.
BUT COULD YOU PROVIDE A LITTLE
BIT MORE DETAIL AROUND WHAT
HELPED PARTICULARLY FROM NINE
TO FOUR YOU KNOW, HELP THESE
RISE TO, YOU KNOW, WANTING TO
BRING THEM IT WAS IT SIMPLY THE
OFFER PRICE OR IS IT A
COMBINATION OF OFFER PRICE AND
PROJECT EXPERIENCE IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES OR OUR OWN KIND
OF WHAT WERE THOSE THOSE
FACTORS IN TERMS OF BRINGING
THESE TO US?
I WILL TRY TO ANSWER THE CBRE
BE PART OF THIS ANSWER FOR US
BECAUSE WE'VE BEEN SORT
OF DRIVING THE PROCESS SO TO
SPEAK IN ANY TRANSACTION.
>> BUT THE BOTTOM LINE IS SOME
OFFERS ARE MORE COMPETITIVE
THAN OTHERS.
EVERYONE HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO
BRING THEIR BEST FOOT WHEN YOU
EVALUATE IT EQUALLY SOME SOME
ROSE JUST ROSE UP THEN THAT'S
WHAT YOU SAW THAT BETTER?
YEAH.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WE DO THIS
DAY IN DAY OUT BETWEEN MY
PUBLIC SECTOR SIDE OF THINGS
AND JACK AND HANK ARE IN THE
MARKET ALL THE TIME WITH
MULTIFAMILY PROJECTS.
WE WE KNOW WHO THE STRONG
PLAYERS ARE.
WE ASKED THEM ALL WHAT THEIR
FINANCING PLANS WERE FOR THIS
WAS IT INSTITUTIONAL MONEY WAS
A CONVENTIONAL MONIES SO WE DID
GET A GOOD FEEL FOR ALL THAT.
THOSE THAT COULDN'T REALLY
ANSWER THAT QUESTION THEY KIND
OF STARTED FALLING DOWN THE
WAYSIDE.
THOSE THAT COULDN'T ANSWER
TIMELINES THEY COULDN'T ANSWER.
THEY HAD HEAVY, HEAVY
CONTINGENCIES.
THEY THEY STARTED DROPPING DOWN
SO I WOULD SAY QUALIFICATIONS,
EXPERIENCES, FINANCIAL
WHEREWITHAL WERE PRETTY
IMPORTANT.
I WOULD NOT SAY THAT PRICE WAS
THE NUMBER ONE.
IT'S JUST A COMBINATION
OF THEM.
I WOULD ALSO JUST CONCEPT, YOU
KNOW, WHAT WE THOUGHT WERE THE
MOST STRONG CONCEPTS THAT ALIGN
WITH THE CITY SCHOOLS.
SO YEAH, I MEAN WE WORK ON A
LOT OF THREE PRODUCTS AROUND
THE COUNTRY AND YOU CAN BUILD
THE DISNEYLAND.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN IT'S GOING TO
WORK.
SO WE WERE COMFORTABLE WITH
THESE PROPOSALS.
I KNOW THEY SEEM DRASTICALLY
DIFFERENT BUT I THINK THEY ALL
FEEL THAT THEY ARE MARKETABLE
SO THAT'S KIND OF HOW WE GOT
THERE
.
SORRY TO BELABOR THIS BUT ALSO
JUST BECAUSE THIS IS A
RELATIVELY NEW PROCESS I MEAN
IT'S NEW FOR I THINK ALL OF US
BUT NOT NECESSARILY YOUR
TYPICAL PROCESS IN TERMS
OF NEXT STEPS.
ARE YOU ALSO I GUESS IF YOU
WERE NOT PLANNING TO COME TO US
WITH A SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATION,
ARE YOU ENVISIONING THE
RESOLUTION IT COMES TO US BEING
SOMETHING THAT THEN WE ARE
DISCUSSING AT THE TABLE WHICH
OFFERS THAT WE ARE HOPING MIGHT
MOVE FORWARD AND WHERE IT MIGHT
COME IN SAYS IT MAY SAY, YOU
KNOW, WE AUTHORIZE THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO MOVE FORWARD
WITH OFFER BLANK AND A BLANK
AMOUNT OF DOLLARS AND WE AMEND
IT FROM THE TABLE.
I GUESS I'M JUST TRYING TO
BETTER UNDERSTAND WHAT THIS
PROCESS WILL BE AS IT PLAYS OUT
SO THAT WE WE CAN KIND
OF ANTICIPATE HOW WE'RE
ENGAGING WITH ONE ANOTHER IN
THE SETTING
AT A CERTAIN POINT
.
FARMERS STANDARD ATTORNEY
COWORKING CORRECT ME AT A
CERTAIN POINT IN A REAL ESTATE
TRANSACTION WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
A REAL CONVERSATION ABOUT
SPECIFICS CLOSED.
IS THAT RIGHT OR NOT RIGHT
UNDER MICHIGAN LAW IT'S FOR
ACQUISITION OR PURCHASE NOT NOT
YOUR ADMINISTRATOR'S PREFERENCE
WOULD NOT BE THAT YOU'RE
AMENDING RESOLUTIONS FROM THE
FLOOR AND GETTING TO THAT LEVEL
OF SPECIFICITY.
I DON'T KNOW IF I MAY JUST BE
INTERPRETING.
I DON'T THINK HE MEANS TO GET
TO THAT.
WE'RE DROPPING IT FROM FIFTEEN
TO FORTY TWO AND A HALF AND SO
FORTH.
I THINK IT'S LIKE WILL THERE BE
A BLANK FOR OFFER A OFFER BLANK
AND WE AT THE FLOOR WILL SAY
YOU
I SUGGEST THAT WE GO FOR
OFFER E AND THEN THAT'LL BE
SECONDED AND VOTED UP OR DOWN
WHEN WE COULD WE COULD DO THAT
I GUESS THE POINT MAYBE
MISUNDERSTOOD YOU THE POINT I'M
TRYING TO GET TO IS WE LIKE THE
WIDEST LATITUDE POSSIBLE TO GO
GET THE DEAL CLOSED ONCE YOU
PICKED WHERE WHERE YOU WANTED
TO GO IF NOT TO TRY TO DO THAT
FROM HERE?
OH SURE.
I JUST MEAN THAT WE'RE TRYING
TO NARROW THE YEAH.
>> AND IF YOU WANT US TO COME
WITH A RECOMMENDATION THAT YOU
CAN THEN REACT TO WHICH IS THE
NORMAL WAY WE DO IT, WE CAN DO
THAT TOO.
BUT CATHERINE SO DO YOU WANT US
TO HAVE CONVERSATIONS WITH YOU
ABOUT OUR REACTIONS TO THE
VARIOUS OPTIONS AND YOU WILL
THINK THINK THEM OVER
ADJUDICATING OUR COMMENTS
AGAINST EACH OTHER THE FIRST
COUNCIL MEMBER IS FOR US TO
RECEIVE ALL OF YOUR QUESTIONS
SIMPLY LIKE WE DO AGENDA
QUESTIONS AND LET US GET THE
ANSWERS TO ALL OF YOUR
QUESTIONS AND ALL ELEVEN OF YOU
WILL THEN SEE THE QUESTION AND
YOU'LL SEE THE ANSWER.
SO WE NEED A PERIOD FOR
ALLOWING FOR THAT THE SEPTEMBER
RESOLUTION IS NOT THAT'S MORE
THE ADMINISTRATION ESTABLISHING
A POINT IN THE PROCESS TO BRING
IT TO THE NEXT STEP AND THE
REASON THAT WE'RE NOT WANTING A
LOT OF TIME TO GO BY IN A SENSE
WE'RE FISHING HERE SO IF YOU
TELL SOMEBODY WE'LL MAKE A
DECISION IN NOVEMBER, YOU KIND
MADE THE DECISION ALREADY
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO WAIT THAT
LONG SO WE HAVE TO GET BACK TO
THEM WITH SOMETHING IN
SEPTEMBER SEEM LIKE A
REASONABLE TIME FRAME TO DO
THAT.
PERHAPS WE WILL WITH COUNCILS
LEAVE THE QUESTION TO THE
ADMINISTRATORS RECOMMENDATION
TO LATER ON THE THEORY THAT THE
ADMINISTRATOR CHOOSES TO
PROVIDE A RECOMMENDATION.
IT WILL NOT BE AN INSULT TO
ANYBODY ARE AT THE TABLE AND
WE'D BE DELIGHTED TO RECEIVE IT
OR IF THE ADMINISTRATOR
DECLINES WE'LL FIGURE OUT WHAT
HAPPENS THEN.
>> OK, THAT'S REASONABLE.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
ANYTHING ELSE FOLKS?
SIBERRY FOLKS, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR COMING IN AND TALKING
TO US TODAY ABOUT ABOUT THESE
TWO LOTS AND FOR THE WORK DONE
TO DATE WE HAVE ALL OF US
OF COURSE SEEING THESE THESE
PARCELS LIE FALLOW FOR QUITE
SOME TIME.
WE KNOW THAT WE HAVE A HOUSING
CRISIS.
WE KNOW THAT WE HAD A BLIGHT
HAS DONE IT FOR 415 AND WE'VE
FINALLY DONE SOMETHING ABOUT
THAT AND I THINK IT'S
EVERYBODY'S HOPE HERE AT THE
TABLE IN THE COMMUNITY THAT
WE'RE ABLE TO SEE A WAY TO HAVE
THESE PARCELS UTILIZED IN A WAY
THAT PROVIDES ADDITIONAL
HOUSING, PROVIDES BROAD
COMMUNITY BENEFIT.
>> BUT THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR QUESTIONS.
THEY ARE VERY HELPFUL.
THANK YOU.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT,
GENERAL TIME, PUBLIC COMMENT.
GENERAL TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCILS IN THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
AT PUBLIC COMMENT GENERAL TIME
ONE NEED NOT TO HAVE SIGNED UP
IN ADVANCE.
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES WILL
HAVE THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLERK WILL NOTIFY WHEN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
PLEASE CONCLUDING REMARKS AND
CEDE THE FLOOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE YOU LIKE TO
SPEAK TODAY?
>> A PUBLIC COMMENT
.
GOOD EVENING KATHY GRISWOLD.
I DON'T KNOW IF YOU WANT MY
ADDRESS BUT I WON'T GIVE IT.
I'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT A
PHRASE THAT WAS REALLY POPULAR
AND THEN WE STOPPED TALKING
ABOUT AND THAT IS IT'S OUR
MONEY IN BUILDINGS.
IT'S OUR MONEY IN BUILDINGS.
I REMEMBER WHEN WE HAD A TEN
YEAR MORATORIUM ON PUTTING IN
NEW STREETLIGHTS AND THAT'S
WHAT I HEARD.
IT'S A HOME MONEY IN BUILDING
SO I'M REALLY EXCITED TONIGHT
BECAUSE WE'RE BACK TO MONEY AND
BUILDINGS.
HOWEVER, WE GOT A LITTLE BIT
OF HOUSEKEEPING TO TAKE CARE
OF IT.
THE FIRST THING IS MILLER
AVENUE AND IT DOESN'T MATTER
WHAT I SAY OR WHAT I THINK
ABOUT ANOTHER AVENUE, IT
DOESN'T MATTER WHAT ANYONE ELSE
SAID OR THINKS ABOUT MILLER
AVENUE.
THERE IS ONLY ONE PERSON THAT
HAS ANY WEIGHT IN THIS AND THAT
IS A PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER
LICENSE WITH THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND I REQUESTED THE
REVIEW EMAIL TO MR HONI ON MAY
19TH TO MY KNOWLEDGE THAT
HASN'T BEEN DONE AND A LOT
OF PEOPLE HAVE SAID A LOT
OF THINGS TO PROVE SOME NOT
TRUE BUT IT DOESN'T REALLY
MATTER BECAUSE WHAT WE NEED IS
A PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER TO
ADDRESS HOW WE CAN DEAL WITH
THE NINETY BEELINES ALONG THE
DRIVEWAY'S AND THE FACT THAT NO
ONE IN THE WORLD HAS A TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK WITH NINETY BLIND
SPOTS.
BUT AGAIN IT DOESN'T MATTER
WHAT I THINK.
IT DOESN'T MATTER WHAT WALK
BIKE WASHTENAW THINGS IT
MATTERS WHAT THE ENGINEER
THINKS AND WE HAVEN'T HEARD
THAT NOW WE GET TO HAVE ONE
COMMENT AND IT WAS WE CHOSE THE
TWO WAY CYCLE TRACK DUE TO
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRAINTS
.
THAT'S VALID BUT HOW ARE WE
GOING TO DEAL WITH THE BLIND
SPOTS?
>> AND I SEE THIS REALLY IS
PART OF OUR BIGGER PROBLEM
WHERE WE JUST IGNORE SIGHT LINE
REQUIREMENTS BECAUSE WE'RE ANN
ARBOR.
I'M WORKING AT THE STATE LEVEL
AS WELL AS A LOCAL ORDINANCE
BASED ON WHAT DEARBORN HAS TO
TRY TO ADDRESS SOME OF THESE
ISSUES.
BUT BECAUSE SCHOOL STARTING
SOON AND I DON'T HAVE LEGAL
PRECEDENTS TO ISSUE A LAWSUIT
FOR A WORK STOPPAGE, THE ONLY
THING I CAN DO IS SIT LITERALLY
ON MILLER AVENUE SO THAT THEN I
DO HAVE A LEGAL RIGHT TO
MAINTAIN MYSELF UNTIL THE CITY
TAKES SOME LEGAL ACTION AND
THAT'S WHAT WE'LL BE DONE AS
SOON AS IT GETS A LITTLE COOLER
.
I'VE GOT THE PR IN PLACE SO
IT'S NOT A THREAT.
I JUST WANT TO LET YOU KNOW
THAT I FEEL VERY STRONGLY THAT
IN ANN ARBOR WE SHOULD NOT BE
CONSTRUCTING DANGEROUS ROADWAYS
THAT ARE GOING TO SIGNIFICANTLY
INCREASE THE RISK OF DEATH TO
PEDESTRIANS.
SO I HOPE WE CAN RESOLVE THIS.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
SPEAKER REPUBLICAN GOOD EVENING
COUNCIL CARQUEST ALL THIRTY
FIVE OF FIVE CHARTER PLACE.
I WANTED TO MENTION THAT I WAS
REVIEWING IT TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION RECORDING FROM A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO IN WHICH A
COMMISSIONER ASKED IT WAS
EITHER STAFF OR CONSULTANT
ABOUT THE DESIGN SPEED OF SOME
AREAS OF NIXON ROAD WHICH IS
UNDER RECONSTRUCTION AND THE
THE RESPONSE WAS THAT THEY
WEREN'T SURE AND YOU KNOW, THIS
COMES ON THE HEELS OF LEARNING
ABOUT THE PACKARD PROJECT
RECONSTRUCTION PROJECT NEAR
DOWNTOWN AND HOW IT DOESN'T
APPEAR WE ARE ENSURING THAT THE
DESIGN SPEED PARTICULARLY
CROSSWALKS ARE GOING TO BE
VISION ZERO COMPLIANT YOU KNOW,
ROUGHLY 20 MILES PER HOUR.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, QUICK BUILDS
ARE GREAT WHEN THEY GET DONE.
BUT IF WE ARE REALLY TRYING TO
BE SERIOUS ABOUT VISION ZERO,
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE ALL OF OUR
RESURFACING AND RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS AT LEAST HAVE A SPEED
CONTROL TARGET SPEED DESIGN
SPEED AT CROSSWALKS THAT WON'T
BE FATAL TO PEOPLE CROSSING.
SO I HOPE YOU CAN LOOK INTO
THIS ESPECIALLY WITH THE ACTIVE
PROJECTS GOING ON NOW.
THANK YOU.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK A
PUBLIC COMMENT?
IS THERE ANYONE ON LINE?
>> I'D LIKE TO SPEAK A PUBLIC
COMMENT.
I MEAN WE HAVE A COUPLE OF CAR
THE PHONE NUMBER AND FIVE THREE
FOR YOU GO.
>> GO AHEAD.
GOOD EVENING.
THIS IS TOM COLBERT CALLING
CALLING IN BASED ON MY
EXPERIENCES FROM A REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPER AND FUTURE DEVELOPER
,REAL ESTATE BROKER AND A
FORMER HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMISSIONER.
SIX YEARS AS COMMISSIONER, TWO
OF THEM AS CHAIR TRY TO MAKE
SURE EVERYBODY REALIZES THAT
THE BUILDING BUILT ON THE
CLIENT BOUGHT WHICHEVER
SOLUTION OUTSIDE WHICHEVER
PROPOSAL TO GO WITH IS GOING TO
LOOM OVER OUR HISTORIC MAIN
STREET AND THAT I HOPE
CONSIDERATION AND THE DESIGNS
TAKEN IN ACCOUNT AS YOU
DELIBERATE THIS AND ASK YOUR
QUESTION TO WITH WASHINGTON
LIKE TO NOTE THAT FEDERAL
POLICY AND LOCAL POLICY ARE
AGAINST BUILDING RESIDENTIAL
NEW RESIDENTIAL IN THE
FLOODPLAIN.
THE SITE IS NEARLY ENTIRELY IN
A FLOOD PLAIN, A SORT
OF FORESIGHTED IN THE FLOODWAY
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
SITE THAT IS IN THE FLOOD
TRENCH IS BARELY ABOVE THE
ELEVATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN
CLIMATE CHANGE IS BRINGING MORE
WATER, MORE SEVERE STORM EVENTS
AND MORE FREQUENTLY SEVERE
STORMS EVENTS.
SO WHAT IS IN THE FLOOD FRINGE
RIGHT NOW MAY VERY WELL BE
SWEPT AWAY EVEN AS SOON AS ANY
BUILDING MIGHT LOOK THERE.
THOSE POLICIES ARE WISE
POLICIES ALSO I'D LIKE TO
MENTION THAT THE SO-CALLED
PREAPPROVE PUDI
IS NOT
PREAPPROVED.
IT WAS PRE-APPROVED WITH A
CONCEPT PLAN NOT A FAKE PLANT.
THIS SITE MUST BE APPROVED BY
THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMISSION AND HAVE NOT GONE TO
A FORMAL SESSION AND BEEN
TURNED UP OR DOWN BY THIS SORT
DISTRICT COMMISSION WHICH IT
MUST BE DONE BUT WORKING FOR
THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMISSION INDICATE THAT THE
CURRENT PLAN WOULD NOT BE
APPROVED.
THERE'S A MEMO OUT THERE.
THERE'S STATEMENTS BY COUNCIL
MEMBERS BUT I THINK IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT THAT THE BROKERS AND
ANY APPLICANT BE FULLY AWARE
COMPLETE TRANSPARENCY TO THE
FACT THAT THE PLAN THAT THEY
THINK IS PRE-APPROVED IS NOT AS
PREAPPROVED AS THEY MIGHT THINK
.
>> THE AGENCY STILL NEEDS TO
SEE IF THEY PLAN A FORMAL
APPLICATION WHICH IT HAS NOT.
BUT IN THE WORKING SESSION IT
WAS QUITE CLEAR THAT WHAT HAS
BEEN SUBMITTED SO FAR ARE
DISCUSSIONS THAT ARE WORKING
SESSION WOULD NOT BE APPROVED.
IT PRESENTED AS IF 30 SECONDS.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
I'M GOOD.
ADAM GOODMAN, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
>> HI.
YES SAID I'M GOOD MAN.
I'M SPEAKING FROM THE FIFTH
FORWARD.
SOME OF YOU ARE PROBABLY
FAMILIAR THAT I WROTE AN
OPINION PIECE IN TWENTY TWENTY
TWO EXPRESSING FREE WINE AS
CURRENTLY CONCEIVED BY THE CITY
BIGGEST AREA OF CONCERN I
SHARED TO THEM WHICH I CONTINUE
TO HOLD NOW IT'S REALLY ABOUT
THESE ELEVATED STRUCTURES.
FIRST OF ALL.
I MEAN THEY MAKE THE PLAN
PREPOSTEROUSLY EXPENSIVE AND
YOU DO NEED TO BE THINKING
ABOUT THE ONGOING MAINTENANCE
LIABILITY IN ADDITION TO THE
INITIAL CONSTRUCTION.
BUT SECOND, MAYBE MORE
IMPORTANTLY, I ACTUALLY THINK
THEY'RE COUNTERPRODUCTIVE TO
OUR CITIES GOALS AROUND
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND
ACCESS FOR ALL MODES AND ALL
USERS.
NOW THAT MIGHT SOUND PRETTY
COUNTERINTUITIVE LIKE HOW COULD
A BUILDING DEDICATED BIKING
MCCAMBRIDGE BE BAD BUT IT
REALLY COMES DOWN TO TWO THINGS
FIRST, MOST PEDESTRIAN LIKE
BRIDGES LIKE THIS OR SIMPLY NOT
CONVENIENT TO USE BECAUSE YOU
HAVE TO CLIMB UP AND THEN BACK
DOWN AND TRAVEL LONGER
DISTANCES JUST TO GET ACROSS
THE ROAD.
AND SECOND, THE SIGNAL THAT
WE'RE SURRENDERING THE GROUND
LEVEL TO BE DOMINATED BY HIGH
SPEED CAR TRAFFIC AND THAT GETS
REALLY PERNICIOUS BECAUSE
PROMOTES AN UNSAFE ENVIRONMENT.
BUT PEOPLE WALKING BIKING WILL
STILL CROSS THE ROAD AT GROUND
LEVEL BECAUSE IT ARE CONVENIENT
TO DO IT THAT WAY.
THEY DON'T WANT TO CLIMB UP AND
OVER CAN WE DO A REAL SERIOUS
SAFETY PROBLEMS IN THAT AREA?
YOU MEAN YOUR SUMMIT AND DPO?
IT'S A BIG BRIGHT HOT SPOT ON
THE CITIES MAP SO IT REALLY
URGENTLY NEEDS TO BE DONE THERE
IS TO MAKE THE ROAD AND THOSE
INTERSECTIONS SAFE FOR ALL
USERS AND I KNOW THE CITY IS
PURSUING A CITY ON THIS RIGHT
NOW AS WEALTH AND THAT
JURISDICTION TRANSFERS A STEP
IN THE WORKS BUT THAT HAS TO BE
THE PRIORITY AND THIS
CONVERSATION ALSO NEEDS TO BE
ABOUT NOT MAKING A SINGLE
LINEAR TRAIL THAT GETS YOU FROM
ONE POINT TO ONE OTHER POINT
BUT A CONNECTED NETWORK OF SAFE
BIKING AND WALKING ROUTES.
AND SO YEAH, THE ONLY CONTEXT
IN WHICH I'D SEE THIS SEGMENT
AS BEING MAYBE CONVENIENT WOULD
BE TAKING IT FROM MS END FROM
THE HARBOR PATH 741 NORTHMEN
AND I HAVE DOUBTS EVEN ABOUT
THAT.
YOU KNOW THE 180 DEGREE CHANGE
THAT'S DEFINITELY A PROBLEM.
THE 90 DEGREE TURN AT THE
BOTTOM OF THE TUNNEL IS ALREADY
BAD ENOUGH.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, IF WE
COULD FIX A FEW MISSING LINKS
AT GROUND LEVEL CROSSING MAIN
SOMET CROSSING DEPOT AT FIFTH
AND IF WE COULD MAKE BRIDGE
CROSSINGS TRULY SAFE FOR ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES AND PLEASANT
TO USE, THEN THOSE LINKS WOULD
BENEFIT PEOPLE TRAVELING IN ALL
KINDS OF DIRECTIONS THROUGH
THIS AREA OF TOWN.
SO I REALLY THINK AGAIN THAT WE
SHOULD BE FOCUSING ON THE ON
GREAT ALTERNATIVE FROM THE
PREVIOUS STUDIES AND PLANS AND
SKIP THIS ELEVATED BRIDGE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
AND SCAVENGE DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
>> HI, THIS IS ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ
CALLING FROM THE FOURTH WARD.
I JUST WANT TO SAY A COUPLE
OF THINGS ABOUT THE TREE LINE
PROJECT, PARTICULARLY THE
GATEWAY BRIDGE.
I MOSTLY AGREE WITH MR GOODMAN
AS A BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY ADVOCATE.
I MAINLY WANT TO MAKE SURE THIS
DOES NOT MEAN WE GIVE UP ON
EXCELLENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS
NORTH MAIN WE NEED TO HAVE SAFE
AT GRADE CROSSINGS THAT
PRIORITIZE THE SAFETY
OF PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS
WITHOUT THE NEED TO CLIMB TO A
BRIDGE TO CROSS THE STREET.
THIS IS WHY I WAS EXCITED TO
SEE REALIGNS IDEAS FOR AN AT
GRADE ALIGNMENT THROUGH WHEELER
PARK IN THE LONG SUMMIT AND I
PREFER THAT OPTION TO THE
GATEWAY BRIDGE.
BUT IF WE'RE GOING TO BUILD
THIS ELEVATED INFRASTRUCTURE I
WANT TO MAKE SURE WE IMPROVE
THE AT GRADE CROSSINGS AS WELL.
THESE CROSSINGS ARE ESSENTIAL
FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT
FOLLOWING THE TRAIL.
LET'S PRIORITIZE FIXING THE
GRADE CROSSINGS BEFORE SPENDING
A LOT OF MONEY ON ELEVATED
INFRASTRUCTURE.
ALSO I THINK IF THE TREE LINE
FOLKS WERE ABLE TO GET
AGREEMENT WITH M AND AMTRAK ON
THEIR ALIGNMENT BETWEEN THE
RAMP THAT GOES DOWN TO THE
TUNNEL UNDER THE BERM, IT
REALLY SHOULDN'T BE AN ISSUE
FOR US TO GET THOSE UNDERPASS
CONNECTED UNDERNEATH THE EAST
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE.
>> SO I'M HOPING THAT WE CAN
LOOK AT HOW WE CAN FIX THAT
PARTICULAR LINK OF THE BORDER
TO BORDER TRAIL.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
, MAYOR.
I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ONLINE TO SPEAK
.
SEE, NO ONE PUBLIC COMMENT IS
CLOSE.
THE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
COUNCIL KELSAN LIBERATES.
THANKS.
I JUST WANT TO ADDRESS A FEW
OF THE COMMENTS THAT GOT
BROUGHT UP TONIGHT.
I CERTAINLY AGREE WITH THE MOST
RECENT CALLERS THAT WE NEED TO
MAINTAIN OUR FOCUS ON SAFE AT
GRADE CROSSINGS.
I DON'T THINK THAT THAT HAS
BEEN THAT THAT WILL I'M SURE
REMAIN A PRIORITY OF THE CITY
FOR US TO BE DOING THAT.
I DID WANT TO EXPLICITLY KIND
OF HESITATED FROM DOING THIS TO
THE TABLE BUT IT'S CONTINUES TO
BE REPEATING PUBLIC COMMENTS.
I JUST WANTED TO ADDRESS
MCCHRYSTAL'S COMMENTS AROUND
MILLAR'S SINCE WE'VE CERTAINLY
REPLIED VIA EMAIL AND PROVIDED
MORE INFORMATION THROUGH THAT
MECHANISM.
BUT FOR THE PUBLIC THIS DESIGN
WAS SELECTED BECAUSE IT DOES
IMPROVE SAFETY AND REDUCES THE
THE GOALS TO REDUCE SERIOUS
INJURIES IN CRASHES.
WE HAVE PROFESSIONAL ENGINEERS
AND WHO HAVE TO REVIEW OUR
PLANS AND SO THAT'S A GREAT
THING ABOUT BEING A CITY IS
HAVING THAT PROFESSIONAL STAFF
ON HAND AND SIMPLY REPEATING
OVER AND OVER AGAIN THAT THIS
IS THERE IS NO PLACE IN THE
WORLD THAT HAS A TWO WAY CYCLE
TRACK LIKE THIS DOES NOT MAKE
IT ACCURATE.
I JUST GOT BACK FROM AN ACTO
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CITY
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS
CONFERENCE AND ACTUALLY BROUGHT
UP THIS PROJECT BECAUSE IT HAD
BEEN RAISED SO MUCH RECENTLY
AND WITHIN A VERY SHORT PERIOD
OF TIME IN A SMALL GROUP WAS
ABLE TO ARTICULATE, IDENTIFY
OTHER PROJECTS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY THAT HAVE BEEN IN PLACE
FOR QUITE SOME TIME SAFELY AND
OUR BELOVED INFRASTRUCTURE IN
THOSE COMMUNITIES.
SO I AM PERSONALLY EXCITED TO
SEE THIS PROJECT COMING TO
FRUITION IN THE FIFTH WARD.
I KNOW I WILL BE USING IT ON A
REGULAR BASIS AND I AM EXCITED
ABOUT THE SAFETY AND THE
ACCESSIBILITY THAT IT'S GOING
TO BRING FOR OUR ENTIRE
COMMUNITY.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA THANK
YOU MAYOR.
JUST WANTED TO REMIND ANYBODY
WHO MIGHT STILL BE LISTENING AT
HOME THAT COUNCILOR GARCIA
ADMIN AND I HAVE A COFFEE HOUR
TOMORROW EVENING AT THE END OUR
SENIOR SENATOR FROM FIVE THIRTY
TO SIX THIRTY PM AND ALSO JUST
TO REMIND FOLKS THAT
ANNIVERSARY IS COMING UP THIS
WEEKEND ON AUGUST 2ND AND SO
JOIN JOIN US IN DOWNTOWN FOR A
CELEBRATION AND MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT FORMER
COUNCIL MEMBER KAZATCHKINE WILL
BE IN TOWN FOR A PARADE SO YOU
MIGHT RUN TO HER DOWNTOWN
CELEBRATING WITH US AS WELL.
SO THANK YOU FOR THE
COMMUNICATIONS KIND
OF EMOTIONAL JOURNEY.
>> PLEASE MOVE BY DISH HARRISON
DISCUSSION ON FLAVOR OPPOSED.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED